retail is the process of selling consumer goods or services to customers through multiple channels of distribution to earn a profit. retailers satisfy demand identified through a supply chain. the term  retailer  is typically applied where a service provider fills the small orders of a large number of individuals  who are end-users  rather than large orders of a small number of wholesale  corporate or government clientele. shopping generally refers to the act of buying products. sometimes this is done to obtain final goods  including necessities such as food and clothing  sometimes it takes place as a recreational activity. recreational shopping often involves window shopping and browsing  it does not always result in a purchase. retail markets and shops have a very ancient history  dating back to antiquity. some of the earliest retailers were itinerant peddlers. over the centuries  retail shops were transformed from little more than  rude booths  to the sophisticated shopping malls of the modern era. most modern retailers typically make a variety of strategic level decisions including the type of store  the market to be served  the optimal product assortment  customer service  supporting services and the store s overall market positioning. once the strategic retail plan is in place  retailers devise the retail mix which includes product  price  place  promotion  personnel and presentation. in the digital age  an increasing number of retailers are seeking to reach broader markets by selling through multiple channels  including both bricks and mortar and online retailing. digital technologies are also changing the way that consumers pay for goods and services. retailing support services may also include the provision of credit  delivery services  advisory services  stylist services and a range of other supporting services. retail shops occur in a diverse range of types and in many different contexts – from strip shopping centres in residential streets through to large  indoor shopping malls. shopping streets may restrict traffic to pedestrians only. sometimes a shopping street has a partial or full roof to create a more comfortable shopping environment – protecting customers from various types of weather conditions such as extreme temperatures  winds or precipitation. forms of non-shop retailing include online retailing (a type of electronic-commerce used for business-to-consumer (b2c) transactions) and mail order.   == etymology == retail comes from the old french word tailler  which means  to cut off  clip  pare  divide  in terms of tailoring (1365). it was first recorded as a noun with the meaning of a  sale in small quantities  in 1433 (from the middle french retail   piece cut off  shred  scrap  paring ). as in the french  the word  retail  in both dutch and german  also refers to the sale of small quantities of items.   == definition and explanation == retail refers to the activity of selling goods or services directly to consumers or
end-users. some retailers may sell to business customers  and such sales are termed non-retail activity. in some jurisdictions or regions  legal definitions of retail specify that at least 80 percent of sales activity must be to end-users.retailing often occurs in retail stores or service establishments  but may also occur through direct selling such as through vending machines  door-to-door sales or electronic channels. although the idea of retail is often associated with the purchase of goods  the term may be applied to service-providers that sell to consumers. retail service providers include retail banking  tourism  insurance  private healthcare  private education  private security firms  legal firms  publishers  public transport and others. for example  a tourism provider might have a retail division that books travel and accommodation for consumers plus a wholesale division that purchases blocks of accommodation  hospitality  transport and sightseeing which are subsequently packaged into a holiday tour for sale to retail travel agents. some retailers badge their stores as  wholesale outlets  offering  wholesale prices.  while this practice may encourage consumers to imagine that they have access to lower prices  while being prepared to trade-off reduced prices for cramped in-store environments  in a strictly legal sense  a store that sells the majority of its merchandise direct to consumers  is defined as a retailer rather than a wholesaler. different jurisdictions set parameters for the ratio of consumer to business sales that define a retail business.   == history == see also  history of merchants  history of the market place   history of marketing   === retailing in antiquity ===  retail markets have existed since ancient times. archaeological evidence for trade  probably involving barter systems  dates back more than 10 000 years. as civilizations grew  barter was replaced with retail trade involving coinage. selling and buying are thought to have emerged in asia minor (modern turkey) in around the 7th millennium bce. gharipour points to evidence of primitive shops and trade centres in sialk hills in kashan (6000 bce)  catalk huyuk in modern-day turkey (7 500–5 700 bce)  jericho (2600 bce) and susa (4000 bce). open air  public markets were known in ancient babylonia  assyria  phoenicia and egypt. these markets typically occupied a place in the town s centre. surrounding the market  skilled artisans  such as metal-workers and leather workers  occupied permanent premises in alleys that led to the open market-place. these artisans may have sold wares directly from their premises  but also prepared goods for sale on market days. in ancient greece markets operated within the agora  an open space where  on market days  goods were displayed on mats or temporary stalls. in ancient rome  trade took place in the forum. rome had two forums  the forum romanum and trajan s forum. the latter was a vast expanse  comprising multiple buildings with shops on four levels. the
roman forum was arguably the earliest example of a permanent retail shop-front. in antiquity  exchange involved direct selling via merchants or peddlers and bartering systems were commonplace.the phoenicians  noted for their seafaring skills  plied their ships across the mediterranean  becoming a major trading power by the 9th century bce. the phoenicians imported and exported wood  textiles  glass and produce such as wine  oil  dried fruit and nuts. their trading skills necessitated a network of colonies along the mediterranean coast  stretching from modern-day crete through to tangiers and onto sardinia the phoenicians not only traded in tangible goods  but were also instrumental in transporting culture. the phoenician s extensive trade networks necessitated considerable book-keeping and correspondence. in around 1500 bce  the phoenicians developed a consonantal alphabet which was much easier to learn that the complex scripts used in ancient egypt and mesopotamia. phoenician traders and merchants were largely responsible for spreading their alphabet around the region. phoenician inscriptions have been found in archaeological sites at a number of former phoenician cities and colonies around the mediterranean  such as byblos (in present-day lebanon) and carthage in north africa.  in the graeco-roman world  the market primarily served the local peasantry. local producers  who were generally poor  would sell small surpluses from their individual farming activities  purchase minor farm equipment and also buy a few luxuries for their homes. major producers such as the great estates were sufficiently attractive for merchants to call directly at their farm-gates  obviating the producers  need to attend local markets. the very wealthy landowners managed their own distribution  which may have involved exporting and importing. the nature of export markets in antiquity is well documented in ancient sources and archaeological case studies. the romans preferred to purchase goods from specific places  oysters from londinium  cinnamon from a specific mountain in arabia  and these place-based preferences stimulated trade throughout europe and the middle east. markets were also important centres of social life.the rise of retailing and marketing in england and europe has been extensively studied  but less is known about developments elsewhere. nevertheless  recent research suggests that china exhibited a rich history of early retail systems. from as early as 200 bce  chinese packaging and branding were used to signal family  place names and product quality  and the use of government-imposed product branding was used between 600 and 900 ce. eckhart and bengtsson have argued that during the song dynasty (960–1127)  chinese society developed a consumerist culture  where a high level of consumption was attainable for a wide variety of ordinary consumers rather than just the elite. the rise of a consumer culture led to the commercial investment in carefully managed company image  retail signage  symbolic brands  trademark protection and sophisticated brand concepts.   === retailing in medieval europe ===  in medieval england and europe  relatively few permanent shops were to be found  instead 
customers walked into the tradesman s workshops where they discussed purchasing options directly with tradesmen. in 13th-century london  mercers and haberdashers were known to exist and grocers sold  miscellaneous small wares as well as spices and medicines  but fish and other perishables were sold through markets  costermongers  hucksters  peddlers or other types of itinerant vendor.in the more populous cities  a small number of shops were beginning to emerge by the 13th century. in chester  a medieval covered shopping arcade represented a major innovation that attracted shoppers from many miles around. known as  the rows  this medieval shopping arcade is believed to be the first of its kind in europe. fragments of chester s medieval row  which is believed to date to the mid-13th century  can still be found in cheshire. in the 13th or 14th century  another arcade with several shops was recorded at drapery row in winchester. the emergence of street names such as drapery row  mercer s lane and ironmonger lane in the medieval period suggests that permanent shops were becoming more commonplace.  medieval shops had little in common with their modern equivalent. as late as the 16th century  london s shops were described as little more than  rude booths  and their owners  bawled as loudly as the itinerants.  shopfronts typically had a front door with two wider openings on either side  each covered with shutters. the shutters were designed to open so that the top portion formed a canopy while the bottom was fitted with legs so that it could serve as a shopboard. cox and dannehl suggest that the medieval shopper s experience was very different. the lack of glazed windows  which were rare during the medieval period  and did not become commonplace until the eighteenth century  meant that shop interiors were dark places. outside the markets  goods were rarely out on display and the service counter was unknown. shoppers had relatively few opportunities to inspect the merchandise prior to consumption. many stores had openings onto the street from which they served customers.outside the major cities  most consumable purchases were made through markets or fairs. markets were held daily in the more populous towns and cities or weekly in the more sparsely populated rural districts. markets sold fresh produce  fruit  vegetables  baked goods  meat  poultry  fish and some ready to eat foodstuffs  while fairs operated on a periodic cycle and were almost always associated with a religious festival. fairs sold non-perishables such as farm tools  homewares  furniture  rugs and ceramics. market towns dotted the medieval european landscape while itinerant vendors supplied less populated areas or hard-to-reach districts. peddlers and other itinerant vendors operated alongside other types of retail for centuries. the political philosopher  john stuart mill compared the convenience of markets/fairs to that of the itinerant peddlers    the contrivance of fairs and markets was early had recourse to
 where consumers and producers might periodically meet  without any intermediate agency  and this plan answers tolerably well for many articles  especially agricultural produce … but were inconvenient to buyers who have other occupations  and do not live in the immediate vicinity … and the wants of the consumers must either be provided for so long beforehand  or must remain so long unsupplied  that even before the resources of society admitted of the establishment of shops  the supply of these wants fell universally into the hands of itinerant dealers  the pedlar  who might appear once a month  being preferred to the fair  which only returned once or twice a year.  blintiff has investigated the early medieval networks of market towns across europe and suggests that by the 12th century there was an upsurge in the number of market towns and the emergence of merchant circuits as traders bulked up surpluses from smaller regional  different day markets and resold them at the larger centralised market towns. market-places appear to have emerged independently outside europe. the grand bazaar in istanbul is often cited as the world s oldest continuously-operating market  its construction began in 1455. the spanish conquistadors wrote glowingly of markets in the americas. in the 15th century  the mexica (aztec) market of tlatelolco was the largest in all the americas.english market towns were regulated from a relatively early period. the english monarchs awarded a charter to local lords to create markets and fairs for a town or village. this charter would grant the lords the right to take tolls and also afford some protection from rival markets. for example  once a chartered market was granted for specific market days  a nearby rival market could not open on the same days. across the boroughs of england  a network of chartered markets sprang up between the 12th and 16th centuries  giving consumers reasonable choice in the markets they preferred to patronise. a study on the purchasing habits of the monks and other individuals in medieval england  suggests that consumers of the period were relatively discerning. purchase decisions were based on purchase criteria such as consumers  perceptions of the range  quality  and price of goods. this informed decisions about where to make their purchases and which markets were superior.braudel and reynold have made a systematic study of these european market towns between the thirteenth and fifteenth century. their investigation shows that in regional districts markets were held once or twice a week while daily markets were common in larger cities. gradually over time  permanent shops with regular trading days began to supplant the periodic markets  while peddlers filled in the gaps in distribution. the physical market was characterised by transactional exchange and the economy was characterised by local trading. braudel reports that  in 1600  goods travelled relatively short distances – grain 5–10 miles  cattle 40–70 miles  wool and woollen cloth 20–40 miles. following the european age
of discovery  goods were imported from afar – calico cloth from india  porcelain  silk and tea from china  spices from india and south-east asia and tobacco  sugar  rum and coffee from the new world.english essayist  joseph addison  writing in 1711  described the exotic origin of produce available to english society in the following terms    our ships are laden with the harvest of every climate  our tables are stored with spices  and oils  and wines  our rooms are filled with pyramids of china  and adorned with the workmanship of japan  our morning s draught comes to us from the remotest corners of the earth  we repair our bodies by the drugs of america  and repose ourselves under indian canopies. my friend sir andrew calls the vineyards of france our gardens  the spice-islands our hot-beds  the persians our silk-weavers  and the chinese our potters. nature indeed furnishes us with the bare necessaries of life  but traffick gives us greater variety of what is useful  and at the same time supplies us with every thing that is convenient and ornamental. luca clerici has made a detailed study of vicenza’s food market during the sixteenth century. he found that there were many different types of reseller operating out of the markets. for example  in the dairy trade  cheese and butter were sold by the members of two craft guilds (i.e.  cheesemongers who were shopkeepers) and that of the so-called ‘resellers’ (hucksters selling a wide range of foodstuffs)  and by other sellers who were not enrolled in any guild. cheesemongers’ shops were situated in the town hall and were very lucrative. resellers and direct sellers increased the number of sellers  thus increasing competition  to the benefit of consumers. direct sellers  who brought produce from the surrounding countryside  sold their wares through the central market place and priced their goods at considerably lower rates than cheesemongers.   === retailing in the 17th  18th and 19th centuries ===  by the 17th century  permanent shops with more regular trading hours were beginning to supplant markets and fairs as the main retail outlet. provincial shopkeepers were active in almost every english market town. these shopkeepers sold general merchandise  much like a contemporary convenience store or a general store. for example  william allen  a mercer in tamworth who died in 1604  sold spices alongside furs and fabrics. william stout of lancaster retailed sugar  tobacco  nails and prunes at both his shop and at the central markets. his autobiography reveals that he spent most of his time preparing products for sale at the central market  which brought an influx of customers into town.as the number of shops grew  they underwent a transformation. the trappings of a modern shop  which had been entirely absent from the sixteenth- and early seventeenth-century store  gradually made way for store interiors
and shopfronts that are more familiar to modern shoppers. prior to the eighteenth century  the typical retail store had no counter  display cases  chairs  mirrors  changing-rooms  etc. however  the opportunity for the customer to browse merchandise  touch and feel products began to be available  with retail innovations from the late 17th and early 18th centuries. glazing was widely used from the early 18th century. english commentators pointed to the speed at which glazing was installed  daniel defoe  writing in 1726  noted that  never was there such painting and guildings  such sashings and looking-glasses as the shopkeepers as there is now.   outside the major metropolitan cities  few stores could afford to serve one type of clientele exclusively. however  gradually retail shops introduced innovations that would allow them to separate wealthier customers from the  riff raff.  one technique was to have a window opening out onto the street from which customers could be served. this allowed the sale of goods to the common people  without encouraging them to come inside. another solution  that came into vogue from the late sixteenth century was to invite favoured customers into a back-room of the store  where goods were permanently on display. yet another technique that emerged around the same time was to hold a showcase of goods in the shopkeeper s private home for the benefit of wealthier clients. samuel pepys  for example  writing in 1660  describes being invited to the home of a retailer to view a wooden jack. the eighteenth-century english entrepreneurs  josiah wedgewood and matthew boulton  both staged expansive showcases of their wares in their private residences or in rented halls.savitt has argued that by the eighteenth century  american merchants  who had been operating as importers and exporters  began to specialise in either wholesale or retail roles. they tended not to specialise in particular types of merchandise  often trading as general merchants  selling a diverse range of product types. these merchants were concentrated in the larger cities. they often provided high levels of credit financing for retail transactions.  by the late eighteenth century  grand shopping arcades began to emerge across europe and in the antipodes. a shopping arcade refers to a multiple-vendor space  operating under a covered roof. typically  the roof was constructed of glass to allow for natural light and to reduce the need for candles or electric lighting. some of the earliest examples of shopping arcade appeared in paris  due to its lack of pavement for pedestrians. retailers  eager to attract window shoppers by providing a shopping environment away from the filthy streets  began to construct rudimentary arcades. opening in 1771  the coliseé  situated on the champs elysee  consisted of three arcades  each with ten shops  all running off a central ballroom. for parisians  the location was seen as too remote and the arcade closed within
two years of opening. inspired by the souks of arabia  the galerie de bois  a series of wooden shops linked the ends of the palais royal  opened in 1786 and became a central part of parisian social life.the architect  bertrand lemoine  described the period  1786 to 1935  as l’ère des passages couverts (the arcade era). in the european capitals  shopping arcades spread across the continent  reaching their heyday in the early 19th century  the palais royal in paris (opened in 1784)  passage de feydeau in paris (opened in 1791) and passage du claire in 1799. london s piccadilly arcade (opened in 1810)  paris s passage colbert (1826) and milan s galleria vittorio emanuele (1878). designed to attract the genteel middle class  arcade retailers sold luxury goods at relatively high prices. however  prices were never a deterrent  as these new arcades came to be the place to shop and to be seen. arcades offered shoppers the promise of an enclosed space away from the chaos that characterised the noisy  dirty streets  a warm  dry space away from the elements  and a safe-haven where people could socialise and spend their leisure time. as thousands of glass covered arcades spread across europe  they became grander and more ornately decorated. by the mid-nineteenth century  they had become prominent centres of fashion and social life. promenading in these arcades became a popular nineteenth-century pass-time for the emerging middle classes. the illustrated guide to paris of 1852 summarized the appeal of arcades in the following description    in speaking of the inner boulevards  we have made mention again and again of the arcades which open onto them. these arcades  a recent invention of industrial luxury  are glass-roofed  marble-paneled corridors extending through whole blocks of buildings  whose owners have joined together for such enterprises. lining both sides of these corridors  which get their light from above  are the most elegant shops  so that the arcade is a city  a world in miniature  in which customers will find everything they need. the palais-royal  which opened to parisians in 1784 and became one of the most important marketplaces in paris  is generally regarded as the earliest example in the grand shopping arcades. the palais-royal was a complex of gardens  shops and entertainment venues situated on the external perimeter of the grounds  under the original colonnades. the area boasted some 145 boutiques  cafés  salons  hair salons  bookshops  museums  and numerous refreshment kiosks as well as two theatres. the retail outlets specialised in luxury goods such as fine jewellery  furs  paintings and furniture designed to appeal to the wealthy elite. retailers operating out of the palais complex were among the first in europe to abandon the system of bartering  and adopt fixed-prices thereby sparing their clientele the hassle of bartering. stores were fitted with long glass exterior
windows which allowed the emerging middle-classes to window shop and indulge in fantasies  even when they may not have been able to afford the high retail prices. thus  the palais-royal became one of the first examples of a new style of shopping arcade  frequented by both the aristocracy and the middle classes. it developed a reputation as being a site of sophisticated conversation  revolving around the salons  cafés  and bookshops  but also became a place frequented by off-duty soldiers and was a favourite haunt of prostitutes  many of whom rented apartments in the building. london s burlington arcade  which opened in 1819  positioned itself as an elegant and exclusive venue from the outset. other notable nineteenth-century grand arcades include the galeries royales saint-hubert in brussels which was inaugurated in 1847  istanbul s çiçek pasajı opened in 1870 and milan s galleria vittorio emanuele ii first opened in 1877. shopping arcades were the precursor to the modern shopping mall.  while the arcades were the province of the bourgeoisie  a new type of retail venture emerged to serve the needs of the working poor. john stuart mill wrote about the rise of the co-operative retail store  which he witnessed first-hand in the mid-nineteenth century. stuart mill locates these co-operative stores within a broader co-operative movement which was prominent in the industrial city of manchester and in the counties of yorkshire and lancashire. he documents one of the early co-operative retail stores in rochdale in manchester  england   in 1853  the store purchased for £745  a warehouse (freehold) on the opposite side of the street  where they keep and retail their stores of flour  butcher s meat  potatoes  and kindred articles.  stuart mill also quoted a contemporary commentator who wrote of the benefits of the co-operative store   buyer and seller meet as friends  there is no overreaching on one side  and no suspicion on the other... these crowds of humble working men  who never knew before when they put good food in their mouths  whose every dinner was adulterated  whose shoes let in the water a month too soon  whose waistcoats shone with devil s dust  and whose wives wore calico that would not wash  now buy in the markets like millionaires  and as far as pureness of food goes  live like lords.   === retailing in the modern era ===  the modern era of retailing is defined as the period from the industrial revolution to the 21st century. in major cities  the department store emerged in the mid- to late 19th century  and permanently reshaped shopping habits  and redefined concepts of service and luxury. the term   department store  originated in america. in 19th-century england  these stores were known as emporia or warehouse shops. in london  the first department stores appeared in oxford street and regent street  where they
formed part of a distinctly modern shopping precinct. when london draper  william whiteley attempted to transform his bayswater drapery store into a department store by adding a meat and vegetable department and an oriental department in around 1875  he met with extreme resistance from other shop-keepers  who resented that he was encroaching on their territory and poaching their customers.  before long  however  major department stores began to open across the us  britain and europe from the mid-nineteenth century  including harrod s of london in 1834  kendall s in manchester in 1836  selfridges of london in 1909  macy s of new york in 1858  bloomingdale s in 1861  sak s in 1867  j.c. penney in 1902  le bon marché of france in 1852 and galeries lafayette of france in 1905. other twentieth-century innovations in retailing included chain stores  mail-order  multi-level marketing (pyramid selling or network marketing  c. 1920s)  party plans (c. 1930s) and b2c e-commerce.many of the early department stores were more than just a retail emporium  rather they were venues where shoppers could spend their leisure time and be entertained. some department stores offered reading rooms  art galleries and concerts. most department stores had tea-rooms or dining rooms and offered treatment areas where ladies could indulge in a manicure. the fashion show  which originated in the us in around 1907  became a staple feature event for many department stores and celebrity appearances were also used to great effect. themed events featured wares from foreign shores  exposing shoppers to the exotic cultures of the orient and middle-east.  during this period  retailers worked to develop modern retail marketing practices. pioneering merchants who contributed to modern retail marketing and management methods include  a. t. stewart  potter palmer  john wanamaker  montgomery ward  marshall field  richard warren sears  rowland macy  j.c. penney  fred lazarus  brothers edward and william filene and sam walton.retail  using mail order  came of age during the mid-19th century. although catalogue sales had been used since the 15th century  this method of retailing was confined to a few industries such as the sale of books and seeds. however  improvements in transport and postal services led several entrepreneurs on either side of the atlantic to experiment with catalogue sales. in 1861  welsh draper pryce pryce-jones sent catalogues to clients who could place orders for flannel clothing which was then despatched by post. this enabled pryce-jones to extend his client base across europe. a decade later  the us retailer  montgomery ward also devised a catalogue sales and mail-order system. his first catalogue which was issued in august 1872 consisted of an 8 in × 12 in (20 cm × 30 cm) single-sheet price list  listing 163 items for sale with ordering instructions for which ward had written the copy. he also devised the catch-phrase  satisfaction guaranteed or your money back 
which was implemented in 1875. by the 1890s  sears and roebuck were also using mail order with great success. edward filene  a proponent of the scientific approach to retail management  developed the concept of the automatic bargain basement. although filene s basement was not the first ‘bargain basement’ in the u.s.  the principles of ‘automatic mark-downs’ generated excitement and proved very profitable. under filene s plan  merchandise had to be sold within 30 days or it was marked down  after a further 12 days  the merchandise was further reduced by 25% and if still unsold after another 18 days  a further markdown of 25% was applied. if the merchandise remained unsold after two months  it was given to charity. filene was a pioneer in employee relations. he instituted a profit sharing program  a minimum wage for women  a 40-hour work week  health clinics and paid vacations. he also played an important role in encouraging the filene cooperative association   perhaps the earliest american company union . through this channel he engaged constructively with his employees in collective bargaining and arbitration processes.  in the post-war period  an american architect  victor gruen developed a concept for a shopping mall  a planned  self-contained shopping complex complete with an indoor plaza  statues  planting schemes  piped music  and car-parking. gruen s vision was to create a shopping atmosphere where people felt so comfortable  they would spend more time in the environment  thereby enhancing opportunities for purchasing. the first of these malls opened at northland mall near detroit in 1954. he went on to design some 50 such malls. due to the success of the mall concept  gruen was described as  the most influential architect of the twentieth century by a journalist in the new yorker. throughout the twentieth century  a trend towards larger store footprints became discernible. the average size of a u.s. supermarket grew from 31 000 square feet (2 900 m2) square feet in 1991 to 44 000 square feet (4 100 m2) square feet in 2000. in 1963  carrefour opened the first hypermarket in st genevieve-de-bois  near paris  france. by the end of the twentieth century  stores were using labels such as  mega-stores  and  warehouse  stores to reflect their growing size. in australia  for example  the popular hardware chain  bunnings has shifted from smaller  home centres  (retail floor space under 5 000 square metres (54 000 sq ft)) to  warehouse  stores (retail floor space between 5 000 square metres (54 000 sq ft) and 21 000 square metres (230 000 sq ft)) in order to accommodate a wider range of goods and in response to population growth and changing consumer preferences. the upward trend of increasing retail space was not consistent across nations and led in the early 21st century to a 2-fold difference in square footage per capita between the united
states and europe.as the 21st century takes shape  some indications suggest that large retail stores have come under increasing pressure from online sales models and that reductions in store size are evident. under such competition and other issues such as business debt  there has been a noted business disruption called the retail apocalypse in recent years which several retail businesses  especially in north america  are sharply reducing their number of stores  or going out of business entirely.   == retail strategy ==  the distinction between  strategic  and  managerial  decision-making is commonly used to distinguish  two phases having different goals and based on different conceptual tools. strategic planning concerns the choice of policies aiming at improving the competitive position of the firm  taking account of challenges and opportunities proposed by the competitive environment. on the other hand  managerial decision-making is focused on the implementation of specific targets. in retailing  the strategic plan is designed to set out the vision and provide guidance for retail decision-makers and provide an outline of how the product and service mix will optimize customer satisfaction. as part of the strategic planning process  it is customary for strategic planners to carry out a detailed environmental scan which seeks to identify trends and opportunities in the competitive environment  market environment  economic environment and statutory-political environment. the retail strategy is normally devised or reviewed every 3– 5 years by the chief executive officer. the strategic retail analysis typically includes following elements   * market analysis  market size  stage of market  market competitiveness  market attractiveness  market trends* customer analysis  market segmentation  demographic  geographic and psychographic profile  values and attitudes  shopping habits  brand preferences  analysis of needs and wants  media habits* internal analysis  other capabilities e.g. human resource capability  technological capability  financial capability  ability to generate scale economies or economies of scope  trade relations  reputation  positioning  past performance* competition analysis  availability of substitutes  competitor s strengths and weaknesses  perceptual mapping  competitive trends* review of product mix  sales per square foot  stock-turnover rates  profitability per product line* review of distribution channels  lead-times between placing order and delivery  cost of distribution  cost efficiency of intermediaries* evaluation of the economics of the strategy  cost-benefit analysis of planned activitiesat the conclusion of the retail analysis  the retail marketers should have a clear idea of which groups of customers are to be the target of marketing activities. retail research studies suggest that there is a strong relationship between a store s positioning and the socio-economic status of customers. in addition  the retail strategy  including service quality  has a significant and positive association with customer loyalty. a marketing strategy effectively outlines all key aspects of firms  targeted audience  demographics  preferences. in a highly competitive market  the retail strategy sets up
long-term sustainability. it focuses on customer relationships  stressing the importance of added value  customer satisfaction and highlights how the store s market positioning appeals to targeted groups of customers.   == the retail marketing mix == see also product management  promotion mix  marketing mix  price  servicescapes and retail design  once the strategic plan is in place  retail managers turn to the more managerial aspects of planning. a retail mix is devised for the purpose of coordinating day-to-day tactical decisions. the retail marketing mix typically consists of six broad decision layers including product decisions  place decisions  promotion  price  personnel and presentation (also known as physical evidence). the retail mix is loosely based on the marketing mix  but has been expanded and modified in line with the unique needs of the retail context. a number of scholars have argued for an expanded marketing  mix with the inclusion of two new ps  namely  personnel and presentation since these contribute to the customer s unique retail experience and are the principal basis for retail differentiation. yet other scholars argue that the retail format (i.e. retail formula) should be included. the modified retail marketing mix that is most commonly cited in textbooks is often called the 6 ps of retailing (see diagram at right).   === product === see product management the primary product-related decisions facing the retailer are the product assortment (what product lines  how many lines and which brands to carry)  the type of customer service (high contact through to self-service) and the availability of support services (e.g. credit terms  delivery services  after sales care). these decisions depend on careful analysis of the market  demand  competition as well as the retailer s skills and expertise.   ==== product assortment ====  the term product assortment refers to the combination of both product breadth and depth. the main characteristics of a company s product assortment are  (1) the length or number of products lines the number of different products carried by a store (2) the breadth refers to the variety of product lines that a store offers. it is also known as product assortment width  merchandise breadth  and product line width.  (3) depth or number of product varieties within a product line the number of each item or particular styles carried by a store (4) consistency how products relate to each other in a retail environment.for a retailer  finding the right balance between breadth and depth can be a key to success. an average supermarket might carry 30 000–60 000 different product lines (product length or assortment)  but might carry up to 100 different types of toothpaste (product depth). speciality retailers typically carry fewer product lines  perhaps as few as 20 lines  but will normally stock greater depth. costco  for example  carries 5 000 different lines while aldi carries just 1 400 lines per store.  large assortments offer consumers many
benefits  notably increased choice and the possibility that the consumer will be able to locate the ideal product. however  for the retailer  larger assortments incur costs in terms of record-keeping  managing inventory  pricing and risks associated with wastage due to spoiled  shopworn or unsold stock. carrying more stock also exposes the retailer to higher risks in terms of slow-moving stock and lower sales per square foot of store space. on the other hand  reducing the number of product lines can generate cost savings through increased stock turnover by eliminating slow-moving lines  fewer stockouts  increased bargaining power with suppliers  reduced costs associated with wastage and carrying inventory  and higher sales per square foot which means more efficient space utilisation. when determining the number of product lines to carry  the retailer must consider the store type  store s physical storage capacity  the perishability of items  expected turnover rates for each line and the customer s needs and expectations.   ==== customer service and supporting services ====  customer service is the  sum of acts and elements that allow consumers to receive what they need or desire from [the] retail establishment.  retailers must decide whether to provide a full service outlet or minimal service outlet  such as no-service in the case of vending machines  self-service with only basic sales assistance or a full service operation as in many boutiques and speciality stores. in addition  the retailer needs to make decisions about sales support such as customer delivery and after sales customer care. retailing services may also include the provision of credit  delivery services  advisory services  exchange/ return services  product demonstration  special orders  customer loyalty programs  limited-scale trial  advisory services and a range of other supporting services. retail stores often seek to differentiate along customer service lines. for example  some department stores offer the services of a stylist  a fashion advisor  to assist customers selecting a fashionable wardrobe for the forthcoming season  while smaller boutiques may allow regular customers to take goods home on approval  enabling the customer to try out goods before making the final purchase. the variety of supporting services offered is known as the service type. at one end of the spectrum  self-service operators offer few basic support services. at the other end of the spectrum  full-service operators offer a broad range of highly personalised customer services to augment the retail experience.when making decisions about customer service  the retailer must balance the customer s desire for full-service against the customer s willingness to pay for the cost of delivering supporting services. self-service is a very cost efficient way of delivering services since the retailer harnesses the customers labour power to carry out many of the retail tasks. however  many customers appreciate full service and are willing to pay a premium for the benefits of full-service.a sales assistant s role typically includes greeting customers  providing
product and service-related information  providing advice about products available from current stock  answering customer questions  finalising customer transactions and if necessary  providing follow-up service necessary to ensure customer satisfaction. for retail store owners  it is extremely important to train personnel with the requisite skills necessary to deliver excellent customer service. such skills may include product knowledge  inventory management  handling cash and credit transactions  handling product exchange and returns  dealing with difficult customers and of course  a detailed knowledge of store policies. the provision of excellent customer service creates more opportunities to build enduring customer relationships with the potential to turn customers into sources of referral or retail advocates. in the long term  excellent customer service provides businesses with an ongoing reputation and may lead to a competitive advantage. customer service is essential for several reasons. firstly  customer service contributes to the customer s overall retail experience. secondly  evidence suggests that a retail organization which trains its employees in appropriate customer service benefits more than those who do not. customer service training entails instructing personnel in the methods of servicing the customer that will benefit corporations and businesses. it is important to establish a bond amongst customers-employees known as customer relationship management.   ===== types of customer service ===== there are several ways the retailer can deliver services to consumers   counter service  where goods are out of reach of buyers and must be obtained from the seller. this type of retail is common for small expensive items (e.g. jewellery) and controlled items like medicine and liquor. click and commute  where products are ordered online and are picked up via a drive through. ship to store  where products are ordered online and can be picked up at the retailer s main store delivery  where goods are shipped directly to consumer s homes or workplaces. mail order from a printed catalogue was invented in 1744 and was common in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. ordering by telephone was common in the 20th century  either from a catalog  newspaper  television advertisement or a local restaurant menu  for immediate service (especially for pizza delivery)  remaining in common use for food orders. internet shopping  – a form of delivery – has eclipsed phone-ordering  and  in several sectors – such as books and music – all other forms of buying. there is increasing competitor pressure to deliver consumer goods – especially those offered online – in a more timely fashion. large online retailers such as amazon.com are continually innovating and as of 2015 offer one-hour delivery in certain areas. they are also working with drone technology to provide consumers with more efficient delivery options. direct marketing  including telemarketing and television shopping channels  are also used to generate telephone orders. started gaining significant market share in developed countries in the 2000s. door-to-door sales  where the salesperson sometimes travels with the goods for sale. self-service  where goods
may be handled and examined prior to purchase. digital delivery or download  where intangible goods  such as music  film  and electronic books and subscriptions to magazines  are delivered directly to the consumer in the form of information transmitted either over wires or air-waves  and is reconstituted by a device which the consumer controls (such as an mp3 player  see digital rights management). the digital sale of models for 3d printing also fits here  as do the media leasing types of services  such as streaming.   === place === place decisions are primarily concerned with consumer access and may involve location  space utilisation and operating hours.   ==== location ==== also see site selection perspective of large retail enterprises of supply chain relationship marketing is based on the theory of supply chain management in large retail enterprises of supply chain in the application of relationship marketing  it emphasizes that the suppliers  large-scale retail enterprises  customers form a chain of large retail enterprises and suppliers to form cooperative marketing  establish mutually beneficial long term good relationship with customers. relationship marketing of huge retail enterprises from the perspective of supply chain mainly includes two relationship markets  supplier relationship and customer relationship market. because the two stakeholders that have the greatest influence on the profits of retail enterprises are suppliers and customers. first  as the supplier of commodities to retail enterprises  it directly determines the procurement cost of commodities to retail enterprises  which is mainly reflected in the purchase price of commodities themselves  the cost incurred in the procurement process  and the loss cost caused by unstable supply of commodities. in addition  the good relationship with supplier interaction  large retail enterprises can also promote the suppliers timely grasp the market information  improved or innovative products according to customer demand  which contributed to the retail enterprises improve the market competitiveness of the goods are sold  so the retail enterprise s relationship with supplier directly affects the retail enterprises in the commodity market competitive. second  due to the transfer of advantages between buyers and sellers  the retail industry has turned to the buyer s market  and consumers have become the key resources for major retailers to compete with each other. therefore  it is very important to establish a good relationship with clients and improve customer loyalty. the relationship marketing of customer relationship market regards the transaction with clients as a long term activity. retail enterprises should pursue long-term mutual benefit maximization rather than a single transaction sales profit maximization. this requires large retail enterprises to establish a customer-oriented trading relationship with the customer relationship market. retail stores are typically located where market opportunities are optimal – high traffic areas  central business districts. selecting the right site can be a major success factor. when evaluating potential sites  retailers often carry out a trade area analysis  a detailed analysis designed to approximate the potential patronage area.
techniques used in trade area analysis include  radial (ring) studies  gravity models and drive time analyses. in addition  retailers may consider a range of both qualitative and quantitative factors to evaluate to potential sites under consideration    ===== macro factors ===== macro factors include market characteristics (demographic  economic and socio-cultural)  demand  competition and infrastructure (e.g. the availability of power  roads  public transport systems)   ===== micro factors ===== micro factors include the size of the site (e.g. availability of parking)  access for delivery vehicles   ==== channels ==== a major retail trend has been the shift to multi-channel retailing. to counter the disruption caused by online retail  many bricks and mortar retailers have entered the online retail space  by setting up online catalogue sales and e-commerce websites. however  many retailers have noticed that consumers behave differently when shopping online. for instance  in terms of choice of online platform  shoppers tend to choose the online site of their preferred retailer initially  but as they gain more experience in online shopping  they become less loyal and more likely to switch to other retail sites. online stores are usually available 24 hours a day  and many consumers in western countries have internet access both at work and at home.   === pricing strategy and tactics === see also pricing strategies  the broad pricing strategy is normally established in the company s overall strategic plan. in the case of chain stores  the pricing strategy would be set by head office. broadly  there are six approaches to pricing strategy mentioned in the marketing literature   operations-oriented pricing  where the objective is to optimise productive capacity  to achieve operational efficiencies or to match supply and demand through varying prices. in some cases  prices might be set to demarket.revenue-oriented pricing  (also known as profit-oriented pricing or cost-based pricing) – where the marketer seeks to maximise the profits (i.e.  the surplus income over costs) or simply to cover costs and break even.customer-oriented pricing  where the objective is to maximise the number of customers  encourage cross-selling opportunities or to recognise different levels in the customer s ability to pay.value-based pricing  (also known as image-based pricing) occurs where the company uses prices to signal market value or associates price with the desired value position in the mind of the buyer. the aim of value-based pricing is to reinforce the overall positioning strategy e.g. premium pricing posture to pursue or maintain a luxury image.relationship-oriented pricing  where the marketer sets prices in order to build or maintain relationships with existing or potential customers.socially-oriented pricing  where the objective is to encourage or discourage specific social attitudes and behaviours. e.g. high tariffs on tobacco to discourage smoking.   ==== pricing tactics ====  when decision-makers have determined the broad approach to pricing (i.e.  the pricing strategy)  they turn their attention to pricing tactics. tactical pricing decisions are
shorter term prices  designed to accomplish specific short-term goals. the tactical approach to pricing may vary from time to time  depending on a range of internal considerations (e.g. the need to clear surplus inventory) or external factors (e.g. a response to competitive pricing tactics). accordingly  a number of different pricing tactics may be employed in the course of a single planning period or across a single year. typically store managers have the necessary latitude to vary prices on individual lines provided that they operate within the parameters of the overall strategic approach. retailers must also plan for customer preferred payment modes – e.g. cash  credit  lay-by  electronic funds transfer at point-of-sale (eftpos). all payment options require some type of handling and attract costs. if credit is to be offered  then credit terms will need to be determined. if lay-by is offered  then the retailer will need to take into account the storage and handling requirements. if cash is the dominant mode of payment  the retailer will need to consider small change requirements  the number of cash floats required  wages costs associated with handling large volumes of cash and the provision of secure storage for change floats. large retailers  handling significant volumes of cash  may need to hire security service firms to carry the day s takings and deliver supplies of small change. a small  but increasing number of retailers are beginning to accept newer modes of payment including paypal and bitcoin. for example  subway (us) recently announced that it would accept bitcoin payments.contrary to common misconception  price is not the most important factor for consumers  when deciding to buy a product.  pricing tactics that are commonly used in retail include   discount pricingdiscount pricing is where the marketer or retailer offers a reduced price. discounts in a variety of forms – e.g. quantity discounts  loyalty rebates  seasonal discounts  periodic or random discounts etc.  everyday low prices (edlp)everyday low prices refers to the practice of maintaining a regular low price-low price – in which consumers are not forced to wait for discounting or specials. this method is extensively used by supermarkets. high-low pricinghigh-low pricing refers to the practice of offering goods at a high price for a period of time  followed by offering the same goods at a low price for a predetermined time. this practice is widely used by chain stores selling homewares. the main disadvantage of the high-low tactic is that consumers tend to become aware of the price cycles and time their purchases to coincide with a low-price cycle. loss leadera loss leader is a product that has a price set below the operating margin. loss leadering is widely used in supermarkets and budget-priced retail outlets where it is intended to generate store traffic. the low price is widely promoted and the store is prepared to take a small loss on an individual item  with an expectation that it will recoup that loss when customers
purchase other higher priced-higher margin items. in service industries  loss leadering may refer to the practice of charging a reduced price on the first order as an inducement and with anticipation of charging higher prices on subsequent orders.  price bundling price bundling (also known as product bundling) occurs where two or more products or services are priced as a package with a single price. there are several types of bundles  pure bundles where the goods can only be purchased as package or mixed bundles where the goods can be purchased individually or as a package. the prices of the bundle is typically less than when the two items are purchased separately. price bundling is extensively used in the personal care sector to prices cosmetics and skincare.  price liningprice lining is the use of a limited number of prices for all product offered by a business. price lining is a tradition started in the old five and dime stores in which everything cost either 5 or 10 cents. in price lining  the price remains constant but quality or extent of product or service adjusted to reflect changes in cost. the underlying rationale of this tactic is that these amounts are seen as suitable price points for a whole range of products by prospective customers. it has the advantage of ease of administering  but the disadvantage of inflexibility  particularly in times of inflation or unstable prices. price lining continues to be widely used in department stores where customers often note racks of garments or accessories priced at predetermined price points e.g. separate racks of men s ties  where each rack is priced at $10  $20 and $40.  promotional pricingpromotional pricing is a temporary measure that involves setting prices at levels lower than normally charged for a good or service. promotional pricing is sometimes a reaction to unforeseen circumstances  as when a downturn in demand leaves a company with excess stocks  or when competitive activity is making inroads into market share or profits. psychological pricing psychological pricing is a range of tactics designed to have a positive psychological impact. price tags using the terminal digit  9  ($9.99  $19.99 or $199.99) can be used to signal price points and bring an item in at just under the consumer s reservation price. psychological pricing is widely used in a variety of retail settings.   === personnel and staffing === because patronage at a retail outlet varies  flexibility in scheduling is desirable. employee scheduling software is sold  which  using known patterns of customer patronage  more or less reliably predicts the need for staffing for various functions at times of the year  day of the month or week  and time of day. usually needs vary widely. conforming staff utilization to staffing needs requires a flexible workforce which is available when needed but does not have to be paid when they are not  part-time workers  as of 2012 70% of retail workers in the united states
were part-time. this may result in financial problems for the workers  who while they are required to be available at all times if their work hours are to be maximized  may not have sufficient income to meet their family and other obligations.   ==== selling and sales techniques ==== also see personal selling  retailers can employ different techniques to enhance sales volume and to improve the customer experience   add-on  upsell or cross-sell. upselling and cross selling are sometimes known as suggestive selling. when the consumer has selected their main purchase  sales assistants can try to sell the customer on a premium brand or higher quality item (up-selling) or can suggest complementary purchases (cross-selling). for instance  if a customer purchases a non-stick frypan  the sales assistant might suggest plastic slicers that do not damage the non-stick surface. selling on value skilled sales assistants find ways to focus on value rather than price. selling on value often involves identifying a product’s unique features. adding value to goods or services such as a free gift or buy 1 get 1 free adds value to customers where as the store is gaining sales know when to close the sale sales staff must learn to recognise when the customer is ready to make a purchase. if the sales person feels that the customer is ready  then they may seek to gain commitment and close the sale. experienced sales staff soon learn to recognise specific verbal and non-verbal cues that signal the client s readiness to buy. for instance  if a customer begins to handle the merchandise  this may indicate a state of buyer interest. clients also tend to employ different types of questions throughout the sales process. general questions such as   does it come in any other colours (or styles)  indicate only a moderate level of interest. however  when clients begin to ask specific questions  such as  do you have this model in black  then this often indicates that the prospect is approaching readiness to buy. when the sales person believes that the prospective buyer is ready to make the purchase  a trial close might be used to test the waters. a trial close is simply any attempt to confirm the buyer s interest in finalising the sale. an example of a trial close  is  would you be requiring our team to install the unit for you  or  would you be available to take delivery next thursday  if the sales person is unsure about the prospect s readiness to buy  they might consider using a  trial close.  the salesperson can use several different techniques to close the sale  including the ‘alternative close’  the ‘assumptive close’  the ‘summary close’  or the ‘special-offer close’  among others.   === promotion === in the 1980s  the customary sales concept in the retail industry began to show many disadvantages. many transactions cost too much  and
the industry was unable to retain customers as it only paid attention to the process of a single transaction rather than to marketing for customer development and maintenance. the traditional marketing theory holds that transactions are one-time value exchange processes and the means of exchanging goods needed by both parties. accordingly  when the transaction is completed  the relationship between the two parties will also end  so the theory is called  transactional marketing . transactional marketing aims to find target consumers  then negotiate  trade  and finally end relationships to complete the transaction. in this one-time transaction process  both parties aim to maximize their own interests. as a result  transactional marketing raises follow-up problems such as poor after-sales service quality and a lack of feedback channels for both parties. in addition  because retail enterprises needed to redevelop client relationships for each transaction  marketing costs were high and customer retention was low. all these downsides to transactional marketing gradually pushed the retail industry towards establishing long-term cooperative relationships with customers. through this lens  enterprises began to focus on the process from transaction to relationship. while expanding the sales market and attracting new customers is very important for the retail industry  it is also important to establish and maintain long term good relationships with previous customers  hence the name of the underlying concept   relational marketing . under this concept  retail enterprises value and attempt to improve relationships with customers  as customer relationships are conducive to maintaining stability in the current competitive retail market  and are also the future of retail enterprises. one of the unique aspects of retail promotions is that two brands are often involved  the store brand and the brands that make up the retailer s product range. retail promotions that focus on the store tend to be ‘image’ oriented  raising awareness of the store and creating a positive attitude towards the store and its services. retail promotions that focus on the product range  are designed to cultivate a positive attitude to the brands stocked by the store  in order to indirectly encourage favourable attitudes towards the store itself. some retail advertising and promotion is partially or wholly funded by brands and this is known as co-operative (or co-op) advertising.retailers make extensive use of advertising via newspapers  television and radio to encourage store preference. in order to up-sell or cross-sell  retailers also use a variety of in-store sales promotional techniques such as product demonstrations  samples  point-of-purchase displays  free trial  events  promotional packaging and promotional pricing. in grocery retail  shelf wobblers  trolley advertisements  taste tests and recipe cards are also used. many retailers also use loyalty programs to encourage repeat patronage.   === presentation === see merchandising  servicescapes  retail design  presentation refers to the physical evidence that signals the retail image. physical evidence may include a diverse range of elements – the store itself including premises  offices
 exterior facade and interior layout  websites  delivery vans  warehouses  staff uniforms.   ==== designing retail spaces ====  the environment in which the retail service encounter occurs is sometimes known as the retail servicescape. the store environment consists of many elements such as smells  the physical environment (furnishings  layout and functionality)  ambient conditions (lighting  temperature  noise) as well as signs  symbols and artifacts (e.g. sales promotions  shelf space  sample stations  visual communications). collectively  these elements contribute to the perceived retail servicescape or the overall atmosphere and can influence both the customer s cognitions  emotions and their behaviour within the retail space. relationship between market large retail enterprises of relationship marketing refers to a large retail enterprise with suppliers  customers  internal organization  channel distributors  market impact  and other competitors such as the interests of the enterprise marketing process related everything to establish and maintain good relations  thus maximizing the interests of the large retail enterprise in the long-term marketing activities  it was based on the relationship marketing concept as the core of innovation. different from traditional marketing concepts  relationship marketing focuses on maintaining long-term good relations with relevant parties on marketing activities. the ultimate goal of relationship marketing is tantamount to maximize the long term interests of enterprises. the marketing activities of large retail enterprises mainly have six relationship markets  which are supplier relationship market  customer relationship market  enterprise internal relationship market  intermediary relationship market at all levels  enterprise marketing activities influence relationship market and industry competitor relationship market. among these six relational markets  supply relational market and customer relational market are the two markets that have the greatest influence on the relationship marketing of large retail enterprises. substantial retail enterprises usually have two sources of profit. the principal source of profit is to reduce the purchase price from suppliers. the other is to develop new customers and keep old clients  so as to expand the market sales of goods. in addition  the extra four related markets have an indirect impact on the marketing activities of large retail enterprises. the internal relationship market of an enterprise can be divided into several different types of relationships according to distinct objects  such as employee relationship market  department relationship market  shareholder relationship market and the mutual relations among the relationship markets. the purpose of carrying out relationship marketing is to promote the cohesion and innovation ability of enterprises and maximize the long term interests of enterprises. another relationship of relationship marketing middlemen is the relationship between market and intermediary in the process of corporate marketing is playing the intermediary role between suppliers and customers  in the current increasingly fierce market competition  more important distribution channels for enterprises  but for retail enterprises  too much sales levels will increase the cost of sales of the enterprise. therefore  large retail enterprises should realize the simplification of sales channel
level by reasonably selecting suppliers. large-scale retail enterprises purchasing goods to suppliers with procurement scale advantage  can directly contact with the product manufacturing  with strong bargaining power  therefore  direct contact with the manufacturer is a large retail enterprise to take the main purchasing mode  it is a terminal to the starting point of zero level channel purchasing mode  therefore  the elimination of middlemen  so as to make the large retail enterprise in the marketing activity  the dealer relationship market is not so important. then there is the enterprise influence relationship market  which is a relational marketing influence in the enterprise supply chain. it mainly guides and standardizes the advance direction of enterprises through formulating systems at the macro level. the relationship market mainly includes the relationship between the relevant government departments at all levels where the enterprise is located  the relationship with the industry association to which the enterprise belongs  and the relationship with all kinds of public organizations  etc.  and the enterprise influence itself cannot directly affect the marketing activities of the enterprise. the final relational market is the industry s competitors  potential competitors  alternative competitors and so on. how to correctly deal with the relationship between competitors and the market has become a problem that large retail enterprises need to solve. retail designers pay close attention to the front of the store  which is known as the decompression zone.this is usually an open space in the entrance of the store to allow customers to adjust to their new environment. an open-plan floor design is effective in retail as it allows customers to see everything. in terms of the store s exterior  the side of the road cars normally travel  determines the way stores direct customers. new zealand retail stores  for instance  would direct customers to the left. in order to maximise the number of selling opportunities  retailers generally want customers to spend more time in a retail store. however  this must be balanced against customer expectations surrounding convenience  access and realistic waiting times. the overall aim of designing a retail environment is to have customers enter the store  and explore the totality of the physical environment engaging in a variety of retail experiences – from browsing through to sampling and ultimately to purchasing. the retail service environment plays an important role in affecting the customer s perceptions of the retail experience.  the retail environment not only affects quality perceptions  but can also impact on the way that customers navigate their way through the retail space during the retail service encounter. layout  directional signage  the placement of furniture  shelves and display space along with the store s ambient conditions all affect patron s passage through the retail service system. layout refers to how equipment  shelves and other furnishings are placed and the relationship between them. in a retail setting  accessibility is an important aspect of layout. for example 
the grid layout used by supermarkets with long aisles and gondolas at the end displaying premium merchandise or promotional items  minimises the time customers spend in the environment and makes productive use of available space. the gondola  so favoured by supermarkets  is an example of a retail design feature known as a merchandise outpost and which refers to special displays  typically at or near the end of an aisle  whose purpose is to stimulate impulse purchasing or to complement other products in the vicinity. for example  the meat cabinet at the supermarket might use a merchandise outpost to suggest a range of marinades or spice rubs to complement particular cuts of meat. as a generalisation  merchandise outposts are updated regularly so that they maintain a sense of novelty.according to ziethaml et al.  layout affects how easy or difficult it is to navigate through a system. signs and symbols provide cues for directional navigation and also inform about appropriate behaviour within a store. functionality refers to extent to which the equipment and layout meet the goals of the customer. for instance  in the case of supermarkets  the customer s goal may be to minimise the amount of time spent finding items and waiting at the check-out  while a customer in a retail mall may wish to spend more time exploring the range of stores and merchandise. with respect to functionality of layout  retail designers consider three key issues  circulation – design for traffic-flow and that encourages customers to traverse the entire store  coordination – design that combines goods and spaces in order to suggest customer needs and convenience – design that arranges items to create a degree of comfort and access for both customers and employees.the way that brands are displayed is also part of the overall retail design. where a product is placed on the shelves has implications for purchase likelihood as a result of visibility and access. products placed too high or too low on the shelves may not turn over as quickly as those placed at eye level. with respect to access  store designers are increasingly giving consideration to access for disabled and elderly customers.  through sensory stimulation retailers can engage maximum emotional impact between a brand and its consumers by relating to both profiles  the goal and experience. purchasing behaviour can be influenced through the physical evidence detected by the senses of touch  smell  sight  taste and sound. supermarkets offer taste testers to heighten the sensory experience of brands. coffee shops allow the aroma of coffee to waft into streets so that passers-by can appreciate the smell and perhaps be lured inside. clothing garments are placed at arms  reach  allowing customers to feel the different textures of clothing. retailers understand that when customers interact with products or handle the merchandise  they are more likely to make a purchase. within the retail environment  different spaces may be designed for different purposes. hard floors  such as
wooden floors  used in public areas  contrast with carpeted fitting rooms  which are designed to create a sense of homeliness when trying on garments. peter alexander  retailer of sleep ware  is renowned for using scented candles in retail stores. ambient conditions  such as lighting  temperature and music  are also part of the overall retail environment. it is common for a retail store to play music that relates to their target market. studies have found that  positively valenced music will stimulate more thoughts and feeling than negatively valenced music  hence  positively valenced music will make the waiting time feel longer to the customer than negatively valenced music. in a retail store  for example  changing the background music to a quicker tempo may influence the consumer to move through the space at a quicker pace  thereby improving traffic flow. evidence also suggests that playing music reduces the negative effects of waiting since it serves as a distraction. jewellery stores like michael hill have dim lighting with a view to fostering a sense of intimacy. the design of a retail store is critical when appealing to the intended market  as this is where first impressions are made. the overall servicescape can influence a consumer s perception of the quality of the store  communicating value in visual and symbolic ways. certain techniques are used to create a consumer brand experience  which in the long run drives store loyalty.   == shopper profiles == two different strands of research have investigated shopper behaviour. one strand is primarily concerned with shopper motivations. another stream of research seeks to segment shoppers according to common  shared characteristics. to some extent  these streams of research are inter-related  but each stream offers different types of insights into shopper behaviour.  babin et al. carried out some of the earliest investigations into shopper motivations and identified two broad motives  utilitarian and hedonic. utilitarian motivations are task-related and rational. for the shopper with utilitarian motives  purchasing is a work-related task that is to be accomplished in the most efficient and expedient manner. on the other hand  hedonic motives refer to pleasure. the shopper with hedonic motivations views shopping as a form of escapism where they are free to indulge fantasy and freedom. hedonic shoppers are more involved in the shopping experience.many different shopper profiles can be identified. retailers develop customised segmentation analyses for each unique outlet. however  it is possible to identify a number of broad shopper profiles. one of the most well-known and widely cited shopper typologies is that developed by sproles and kendal in the mid-1980s. sproles and kendall s consumer typology has been shown to be relatively consistent across time and across cultures. their typology is based on the consumer s approach to making purchase decisions. quality conscious/perfectionist  quality-consciousness is characterised by a consumer s search for the very best quality in products  quality conscious consumers tend to shop systematically making more comparisons and
shopping around. brand-conscious  brand-consciousness is characterised by a tendency to buy expensive  well-known brands or designer labels. those who score high on brand-consciousness tend to believe that the higher prices are an indicator of quality and exhibit a preference for department stores or top-tier retail outlets. recreation-conscious/hedonistic  recreational shopping is characterised by the consumer s engagement in the purchase process. those who score high on recreation-consciousness regard shopping itself as a form of enjoyment. price-conscious  a consumer who exhibits price-and-value consciousness. price-conscious shoppers carefully shop around seeking lower prices  sales or discounts and are motivated by obtaining the best value for money novelty/fashion-conscious  characterised by a consumer s tendency to seek out new products or new experiences for the sake of excitement  who gain excitement from seeking new things  they like to keep up-to-date with fashions and trends  variety-seeking is associated with this dimension. impulsive  impulsive consumers are somewhat careless in making purchase decisions  buy on the spur of the moment and are not overly concerned with expenditure levels or obtaining value. those who score high on impulsive dimensions tend not to be engaged with the object at either a cognitive or emotional level. confused (by over-choice)  characterised by a consumer s confusion caused by too many product choices  too many stores or an overload of product information  tend to experience information overload. habitual/brand loyal  characterised by a consumer s tendency to follow a routine purchase pattern on each purchase occasion  consumers have favourite brands or stores and have formed habits in choosing  the purchase decision does not involve much evaluation or shopping around.some researchers have adapted sproles and kendall s methodology for use in specific countries or cultural groups. consumer decision styles are important for retailers and marketers because they describe behaviours that are relatively stable over time and for this reason  they are useful for market segmentation.   == retail format  types of retail outlet == the retail format (also known as the retail formula) influences the consumer s store choice and addresses the consumer s expectations. at its most basic level  a retail format is a simple marketplace  that is  a location where goods and services are exchanged. in some parts of the world  the retail sector is still dominated by small family-run stores  but large retail chains are increasingly dominating the sector  because they can exert considerable buying power and pass on the savings in the form of lower prices. many of these large retail chains also produce their own private labels which compete alongside manufacturer brands. considerable consolidation of retail stores has changed the retail landscape  transferring power away from wholesalers and into the hands of the large retail chains.in britain and europe  the retail sale of goods is designated as a service activity. the european service directive applies to all retail trade including periodic markets  street traders and peddlers.   === retail type by product ===
retail stores may be classified by the type of product carried   food retailersretailers carrying highly perishable foodstuffs such as meat  dairy and fresh produce typically require cold storage facilities. consumers purchase food products on a very regular purchase cycle – e.g. daily  weekly or monthly.  softline retailerssoftline retailers sell goods that are consumed after a single use  or have a limited life (typically under three years) in they are normally consumed. soft goods include clothing  other fabrics  footwear  toiletries  cosmetics  medicines and stationery.  grocery and convenience retailgrocery stores  including supermarkets and hypermarkets  along with convenience stores carry a mix of food products and consumable household items such as detergents  cleansers  personal hygiene products. consumer consumables are collectively known as fast-moving-consumer goods (fmcg) and represent the lines most often carried by supermarkets  grocers and convenience stores. for consumers  these are regular purchases and for the retailer  these products represent high turnover product lines. grocery stores and convenience stores carry similar lines  but a convenience store (staffed or automated) is often open at times that suit its clientele and may be located for ease of access.  hardline retailersretailers selling consumer durables are sometimes known as hardline retailers – automobiles  appliances  electronics  furniture  sporting goods  lumber  etc.  and parts for them. goods that do not quickly wear out and provide utility over time. for the consumer  these items often represent major purchase decisions. consumers purchase durables over longer purchase decision cycles. for instance  the typical consumer might replace their family car every 5 years  and their home computer every 4 years.  specialist retailersspecialist retailers operate in many industries such as the arts e.g. green grocers  contemporary art galleries  bookstores  handicrafts  musical instruments  gift shops. types of retail outlet by product type                            === retail types by marketing strategy === types of retail outlets (retail shops  retail stores) by marketing strategy include   arcadea shopping arcade refers to a group of retail outlets operating under a covered walkway. arcades are similar to shopping malls  although they typically comprise a smaller number of outlets. shopping arcades were the evolutionary precursor to the shopping mall  and were very fashionable in the late 19th century. stylish men and women would promenade around the arcade  stopping to window shop  making purchases and also taking light refreshments in one of the arcade s tea-rooms. arcades offered fashionable men and women opportunities to  be seen  and to socialise in a relatively safe environment. arcades continue to exist as a distinct type of retail outlet. historic 19th-century arcades have become popular tourist attractions in cities around the world. amusement arcades  also known as penny arcades in the us  are more
modern incarnation of the eighteenth and nineteenth century shopping arcade.  anchor storean anchor store (also known as draw tenant or anchor tenant) is a larger store with a good reputation used by shopping mall management to attract a certain volume of shoppers to a precinct. bazaarthe term   bazaar  can have multiple meanings. it may refer to a middle-eastern market place while a  penny bazaar  refers to a retail outlet that specialises in inexpensive or discounted merchandise. in the united states a bazaar can mean a  rummage sale  which describes a charity fundraising event held by a church or other community organization and in which either donated used goods are made available for sale.  boutiquea boutique is a small store offering a select range of fashionable goods or accessories. the term   boutique  in retail and services  appears to be taking on a broader meaning with popular references to retail goods and retail services such as boutique hotels  boutique beers (i.e. craft beers)  boutique investments etc.  category killerby supplying a wide assortment in a single category for lower prices a category killer retailer can  kill  that category for other retailers. a category killer is a specialist store that dominates a given category. toys  r  us  established in 1957  is thought to be the first category killer  dominating the children s toys and games market. for a few categories  such as electronics  home hardware  office supplies and children s toys  the products are displayed at the centre of the store and a sales person will be available to address customer queries and give suggestions when required. rival retail stores are forced to reduce their prices if a category killer enters the market in a given geographic area. examples of category killers include toys  r  us and australia s bunnings (hardware  diy and outdoor supplies) and officeworks (stationery and supplies for the home office and small office). some category killers redefine the category. for example  australia s bunnings began as a hardware outlet  but now supplies a broad range of goods for the home handyman or small tradesman  including kitchen cabinetry  craft supplies  gardening needs and outdoor furniture. similarly officeworks straddles the boundary between stationery supplies  office furniture and digital communications devices in its quest to provide for all the needs of the retail consumer and the small  home office.  chain storechain store is one of a series of stores owned by the same company and selling the same or similar merchandise. chain stores aim to benefit from volume buying discounts (economies of scale) and achieve cost savings through economies of scope (e.g. centralised warehousing  marketing  promotion and administration) and pass on the cost savings in the form of lower prices.  concept storeconcept stores are similar to speciality stores in that they are very small in size  and only stock a limited range of
brands or a single brand. they are typically operated by the brand that controls them. example  l occitane en provence. the limited size and offering of l occitane s stores is too small to be considered a speciality store. however  a concept store goes beyond merely selling products  and instead offers an immersive customer experience built around the way that a brand fits with the customer s lifestyle. examples include apple s concept stores  kit kat s concept store in japan.  co-operative storea co-operative store  also known as a co-op or coop  is a venture owned and operated by consumers to meet their social  economic and cultural needs. convenience storea convenience store provides limited amount of merchandise at above average prices with a speedy checkout. this store is ideal for emergency and immediate purchase consumables as it often operates with extended hours  stocking every day. department storedepartment stores are very large stores offering an extensive assortment of both  soft  and  hard  goods which often bear a resemblance to a collection of specialty stores. a retailer of such store carries a variety of categories and has a broad assortment of goods at moderate prices. they offer considerable customer service. destination storea destination store is one that customers will initiate a trip specifically to visit  sometimes over a large area. these stores are often used to  anchor  a shopping mall or plaza  generating foot traffic  which is capitalized upon by smaller retailers. demographicretailers that aim at one particular segment (e.g. high-end/ luxury retailers focusing on wealthy individuals or niche market).  discount storediscount stores tend to offer a wide array of products and services  but they compete mainly on price. they offer extensive assortments of merchandise at prices lower than other retailers and are designed to be affordable for the market served. in the past  retailers sold less fashion-oriented brands. however  in more recent years companies such as tjx companies (own t.j. maxx and marshalls) and ross stores are discount store operations increasingly offering fashion-oriented brands on a larger scale. e-tailerthe customer can shop and order through the internet and the merchandise is dropped at the customer s doorstep or an e-tailer. in some cases  e-retailers use drop shipping technique. they accept the payment for the product but the customer receives the product directly from the manufacturer or a wholesaler. this format is ideal for customers who do not want to travel to retail stores and are interested in home shopping.  general merchandise retailera general merchandise retailer stocks a variety of products in considerable depth. the types of product offerings vary across this category. department stores  convenience stores  hypermarkets and warehouse clubs are all examples of general merchandise retailers. general storea general store is a store that supplies the main needs of the local community and is often located in outback or rural areas with low population densities. in areas of very low population density  a general store
may be the only retail outlet within hundreds of miles. the general store carries a very broad product assortment  from foodstuffs and pharmaceuticals through to hardware and fuel. in addition  a general store may provide essential services such as postal services  banking services  news agency services and may also act as an agent for farm equipment and stock-food suppliers. give-away shopas the name implies  a give-away shop provides goods for free. there are several different models of give-away shop in popular use. one is where goods are free to any shopper  an alternative is that shoppers must provide a product before they can take a product and a third variation is where consumers have the option of taking goods for free or paying any amount that they can afford. for example  australia s restaurant group lentil as anything operates on a pay whatever you feel is right model. hawkershawkers also known as a peddlers  costermongers or street vendors  refer to a vendor of merchandise that is readily portable. hawkers typically operate in public places such as streets  squares  public parks or gardens or near the entrances of high traffic venues such as zoos  music and entertainment venues  but may also call on homes for door-to-door seling. hawkers are a relatively common sight across asia.  high street storea high street store is a term used widely in the united kingdom where more than 5 000 high streets where a variety of stores congregate along a main road. stores situated in the high street provide for the needs of a local community  and often give a locality a unique identity.  hypermarketsa hypermarket (also known as hypermart) provides variety and huge volumes of exclusive merchandise at low margins. the operating cost is comparatively less than other retail formats  may be defined as  a combined supermarket and discount store  at least 200 000 square feet (19 000 m2) or larger  that sells a wide variety of food and general merchandise at a low price.  malla mall has a range of retail shops at a single building or outlet  arranged on a single level or multiple levels. a shopping mall typically includes one or more anchor stores. the retail mix in a mall may include outlets such as food and entertainment  grocery  electronics  furniture  gifts and fashion. malls provide 7% of retail revenue in india  10% in vietnam  25% in china  28% in indonesia  39% in the philippines  and 45% in thailand. malls are typically managed by a central management/ marketing authority which ensures that the mall attracts the right type of retailer and an appropriate retail mix.  mom-and-pop storea small retail outlet owned and operated by an individual or family. focuses on a relatively limited and selective set of products.  pop-up retail storea pop-up retail store is a temporary retail space that opens for a short period of time  possibly opening to
sell a specific run of merchandise or for a special occasion or holiday period. the key to the success of a pop-up is novelty in the merchandise. retail marketplacea marketplace is defined as venue for the retail sales of all products  packed and unpacked where the sale is to end users. in practice  retail markets are most often associated with the sale of fresh produce  including fruit  vegetables  meat  fish and poultry  but may also sell small consumable household goods such as cleaning agents. globally  different terms may be used to refer to a retail market. for instance  in the middle east  a market place may be known as a bazaar or souq/souk  market squarea market square is a city square where traders set up temporary stalls and buyers browse for purchases. in england  such markets operate on specific days of the week. this kind of market is very ancient  and countless such markets are still in operation around the world.  speciality storea speciality (ae  specialty) store has a narrow marketing focus  – either specializing on specific merchandise  such as toys  footwear  or clothing  or on a target audience  such as children  tourists  or plus-size women. size of store varies  – some speciality stores might be retail giants such as toys  r  us  foot locker  and the body shop  while others might be small  individual shops such as nutters of savile row. such stores  regardless of size  tend to have a greater depth of the specialist stock than general stores  and generally offer specialist product knowledge valued by the consumer. pricing is usually not the priority when consumers are deciding upon a speciality store  factors such as branding image  selection choice  and purchasing assistance are seen as important. they differ from department stores and supermarkets which carry a wide range of merchandise. supermarketa supermarket is a self-service store consisting mainly of grocery and limited products on non-food items. they may adopt a hi-lo or an edlp strategy for pricing. the supermarkets can be anywhere between 20 000 square feet (1 900 m2) and 40 000 square feet (3 700 m2). example  spar supermarket.  variety storevariety stores offer extremely low-cost goods  with a vast array of selection. the downfall to this is that the items are not very high quality. vending machine a vending machine is an automated piece of equipment wherein customers can drop the money in the machine which dispenses the customer s selection. the vending machine is a pure self-service option. machines may carry a phone number which customers can call in the event of a fault.some stores take a no frills approach  while others are  mid-range  or  high end  depending on what income level they target.  warehouse clubwarehouse clubs are membership-based retailers that usually sell a wide variety of merchandise  in which customers
may buy large  wholesale quantities of the store s products  which makes these clubs attractive to both bargain hunters and small business owners. the clubs are able to keep prices low due to the no-frills format of the stores. in addition  customers may be required to pay annual membership fees in order to shop. warehouse storewarehouse stores are retailers housed in warehouses  and offer low-cost  often high-quantity goods with minimal services  e.g. goods are piled on pallets or steel shelves. shopping aisles are narrow and cramped  added-value services such as home delivery are non-existent.   === other retail types === other types of retail store include   automated retail stores  – self-service  robotic kiosks located in airports  malls and grocery stores. the stores accept credit cards and are usually open 24/7. examples include zoomshops and redbox. big-box stores  – encompass larger department  discount  general merchandise  and warehouse stores. second-hand retail  some shops sell second-hand goods. in the case of a nonprofit shop  the public donates goods to the shop to be sold. in give-away shops goods can be taken free. pawnbrokers another form is the pawnshop  in which goods are sold that were used as collateral for loans. there are also  consignment  shops  which are where a person can place an item in a store and if it sells  the person gives the shop owner a percentage of the sale price. the advantage of selling an item this way is that the established shop gives the item exposure to more potential buyers. e-tailers like olx and quikr also offer second-hand goods.retailers can opt for a format as each provides different retail mix to its customers based on their customer demographics  lifestyle and purchase behaviour. an effective format will dtermine how products are display products  as well as how target customers are attracted.   == challenges == to achieve and maintain a foothold in an existing market  a prospective retail establishment must overcome the following hurdles   regulatory barriers including restrictions on real estate purchases  especially as imposed by local governments and against  big-box  chain retailers  restrictions on foreign investment in retailers  in terms of both absolute amount of financing provided and percentage share of voting stock (e.g. common stock) purchased  unfavourable taxation structures  especially those designed to penalize or keep out  big box  retailers (see  regulatory  above)  absence of developed supply chain and integrated it management  high competitiveness among existing market participants and resulting low profit margins  caused in part by constant advances in product design resulting in constant threat of product obsolescence and price declines for existing inventory  and lack of properly educated and/or trained work force  often including management  caused in part by loss in business. lack of educational infrastructure enabling prospective market entrants to respond to the above challenges.   == global top
ten retailers ==  china is currently the largest retail market in the world.   == competition == retail stores may or may not have competitors close enough to affect their pricing  product availability  and other operations. a 2006 survey found that only 38% of retail stores in india believed they faced more than slight competition. competition also affected less than half of retail stores in kazakhstan  bulgaria  and azerbaijan. in all countries the main competition was domestic  not foreign. retail trade provides 9% of all jobs in india and 14% of gdp.   === mergers and acquisitions === between 1985 and 2018 there have been 46 755 mergers or acquisitions conducted globally in the retail sector (either acquirer or target from the retail industry). these deals cumulate to an overall known value of around us$2 561 billion. the three major retail m&a waves took place in 2000  2007 and lately in 2017. however the all-time high in terms of number of deals was in 2016 with more than 2 700 deals. in terms of added value 2007 set the record with us$225 billion.here is a list of the top ten largest deals (ranked by volume) in the retail industry    == statistics for national retail sales ==   === united states === stores magazine annually ranks the nation s top retailers according to sales.top 100 chart  since 1951  the u.s. census bureau has published the retail sales report every month. it is a measure of consumer spending  an important indicator of the us gdp. retail firms provide data on the dollar value of their retail sales and inventories. a sample of 12 000 firms is included in the final survey and 5 000 in the advanced one. the advanced estimated data is based on a subsample from the us cb complete retail & food services sample.   === central europe === in 2011  the grocery market in six countries of central europe was worth nearly €107bn  2.8% more than the previous year when expressed in local currencies. the increase was generated foremost by the discount stores and supermarket segments  and was driven by the skyrocketing prices of foodstuffs. this information is based on the latest pmr report entitled grocery retail in central europe 2012   === world ===  national accounts show a combined total of retail and wholesale trade  with hotels and restaurants. in 2012 the sector provides over a fifth of gdp in tourist-oriented island economies  as well as in other major countries such as brazil  pakistan  russia  and spain. in all four of the latter countries  this fraction is an increase over 1970  but there are other countries where the sector has declined since 1970  sometimes in absolute terms  where other sectors have replaced its role in the economy. in the united states the sector has declined from 19% of gdp to 14%  though it has risen in absolute
terms from $4 500 to $7 400 per capita per year. in china the sector has grown from 7.3% to 11.5%  and in india even more  from 8.4% to 18.7%. emarketer predicts china will have the largest retail market in the world in 2016.in 2016  china became the largest retail market in the world.   == consolidation == among retailers and retails chains a lot of consolidation has appeared over the last couple of decades. between 1988 and 2010  worldwide 40 788 mergers & acquisitions with a total known value of us$2.255 trillion have been announced. the largest transactions with involvement of retailers in/from the united states have been  the acquisition of albertson s inc. for 17 bil. usd in 2006  the merger between federated department stores inc with may department stores valued at 16.5 bil. usd in 2005 – now macy s  and the merger between kmart holding corp and sears roebuck & co with a value of 10.9 bil. usd in 2004.   == gallery ==          == see also ==  types of sales person   types of store or shop   influential thinkers in sales and retail  dale carnegie  author and lecturer  proponent of salesmanship  public speaking and self-improvement e. st. elmo lewis  salesmen for ncr and developer of the aida model of selling william thomas rawleigh  founder of rawleigh s company with one of the largest travelling sales teams in the united states harry gordon selfridge  founder of uk selfridges  redefined shopping away from essential errand to a pleasurable activity  was noted for introducing a touch of theatre and celebrity appearances to department stores  also wrote the book  the romance of commerce published in 1918. walter dill scott  psychologist and author  wrote a number of books on the psychology of selling in the early twentieth century thomas j. watson  salesman at ncr and ceo of ibm  often described as the  greatest american salesman    == references ==   == further reading == adburgham  a.  shopping in style  london from the restoration to edwardian elegance  london  thames and hudson  1979 alexander  a.   the study of british retail history  progress and agenda  in the routledge companion to marketing history  d.g. brian jones and mark tadajewski (eds.)  oxon  routledge  2016  pp. 155–72 feinberg  r.a. and meoli  j.  [online
trader may refer to   merchant  retailer or one who attempts to generally buy wholesale and sell later at a profit the owner of a trading post  where manufactured goods were exchanged with native peoples for furs and hides. trader (finance)  someone who buys and sells financial instruments such as stocks  bonds  derivatives  etc. trader classified media  classified advertisement company trader media east  largest classified advertising company in central and eastern europe trader (comics)  the name of two separate fictional characters in the marvel comics universe  the trader  a song by the beach boys from their album holland a merchant vessel  a boat or ship that transports cargo or carries passengers for hire. this excludes pleasure craft that do not carry passengers for hire and warships   == traders == one of the brands under shangri-la hotels traders (video game)  a dos video game published in 1991 traders (tv series) (1996–2000)  canadian drama on global television network   == see also == trader horn (1861–1931)  ivory trader in central africa  the subject of more than one film trader monthly  magazine for financial traders
in a supply chain  a vendor  or a seller  is an enterprise that contributes goods or services. generally  a supply chain vendor manufactures inventory/stock items and sells them to the next link in the chain. today  these terms refer to a supplier of any goods or service.   == description == a vendor  or a supplier  is a supply chain management term that means anyone who provides goods or services  of experience to another entity. vendors may sell b2b (business-to-business  i.e.  to other companies)  b2c (business to consumers)  or b2g (business to government). some vendors manufacture inventoriable items and then sell those items to customers  while other vendors offer services or experiences. typically vendors are tracked in either a finance system or a warehouse management system. vendors are often managed with a vendor compliance checklist or vendor quality audits  and these activities can be effectively managed by software toolspurchase orders are usually used as a contractual agreement with vendors to buy goods or services. vendors may or may not function as distributors or manufacturers of goods.  if vendors are also manufacturers  they may either build to stock or build to order.  vendor  is often a generic term  used for suppliers of industries from retail sales to manufacturers to city organizations.  the term generally applies only to the immediate seller  or the organization that is paid for the goods  rather than to the original manufacturer or the organization performing the service if it is different from the immediate supplier.   == see also == peddling retailer wholesaler   == references ==
a shopkeeper is an individual who owns or runs a shop. also known as a  storey . generally  shop employees are not shopkeepers  but are often incorrectly referred to as shopkeepers. at larger companies  a shopkeeper is usually referred to as a manager  since the owner is not able to manage the business being a single shopkeeper  so this term could apply to larger firms (in particular  multiple shops) generally and be a separate duty.   == job descriptions == shopkeepers may manage their own independent corner shop or run a franchise store on behalf of a retail chain. unlike store managers who usually work for a large retailer  shopkeepers will normally have overall responsibility for a store. independent shopkeepers include (but are not limited to) grocers  corner shops  butchers  bakers  booksellers  florists  and antique dealers. a shopkeeper would serve clients at a counter and carry out other duties such as taking customer payments  giving change  helping customers and wrapping gifts and purchases. most of the time shopkeepers are answering customer s enquirers  giving advice about products to customers and listening to customers’ needs and requests  which can indicate new sales opportunities. they also calculate daily takings  prepare pages  deposit cash at the bank  book-keep and stock take to ensure that the stocks are available all the time. ordering stock from wholesalers  manufacturers  agents and importers  sometimes this task can also given to small shop keeper if the shop is too small and don t have purchaser. shop-keeping is a non-farm activity. many people in the village owns a small shop and sells household products. people in the village do this work if they don t get work in the farm or for the daily income. in big cities  there are big-big malls instead of small shops.   == see also == nation of shopkeepers   == further reading == winstanley  michael j. (1983) the busnessmen s world  1830-1914. manchester  manchester university press isbn 9780719007286
a merchant is a person who trades in commodities produced by other people. historically  a merchant is anyone who is involved in business or trade. merchants have operated for as long as industry  commerce  and trade have existed. in 16th-century europe  two different terms for merchants emerged  meerseniers referred to local traders (such as bakers and grocers) and koopman (dutch  koopman) referred to merchants who operated on a global stage  importing and exporting goods over vast distances and offering added-value services such as credit and finance. the status of the merchant has varied during different periods of history and among different societies. in ancient rome and greece merchants could become wealthy  but lacked high social status. in contrast  in the middle east  where markets were an integral part of the city  merchants enjoyed high status. in modern times  the term merchant has occasionally been used to refer to a businessperson or someone undertaking activities (commercial or industrial) for the purpose of generating profit  cash flow  sales  and revenue utilizing a combination of human  financial  intellectual and physical capital with a view to fueling economic development and growth.  merchants have been known for as long as humans have engaged in trade and commerce. merchants and merchant networks operated in ancient babylonia and assyria  china  egypt  greece  india  persia  phoenicia  and rome. during the european medieval period  a rapid expansion in trade and commerce led to the rise of a wealthy and powerful merchant class. the european age of discovery opened up new trading routes and gave european consumers access to a much broader range of goods. from the 1600s  goods began to travel much further distances as they found their way into geographically dispersed market-places.  following the opening of asia to european trade and the discovery of the new world  merchants imported goods over very long distances  calico cloth from india  porcelain  silk and tea from china  spices from india and south-east asia and tobacco  sugar  rum and coffee from the new world. by the eighteenth century  a new type of manufacturer-merchant had started to emerge and modern business practices were becoming evident.   == etymology and usage ==  the english term  merchant comes from the middle english  marchant  which itself originated from the vulgar latin mercatant or mercatans  formed from present participle of mercatare ( to trade  to traffic or to deal in ). the term refers to any type of reseller  but can also be used with a specific qualifier to suggest a person who deals in a given characteristic such as speed merchant  which refer to someone who enjoys fast driving  noise merchant  which refers to a group of musical performers  dream merchant  which refers to someone who peddles idealistic visionary scenarios  merchant of war  which refers disparagingly to
proponents of war. elizabeth honig has argued that concepts relating to the role of a merchant began to change in the mid-16th century. the dutch term  koopman  became rather more fluid during the 16th century when antwerp was the most global market town in europe. two different terms  for a merchant  began to be used  meerseniers referred to local merchants including bakers  grocers  sellers of dairy products and stall-holders  while the alternate term  koopman  referred to those who traded in goods or credit on a large scale. this distinction was necessary to separate the daily trade that the general population understood from the rising ranks of traders who took up their places on a world stage and were seen as quite distant from everyday experience.   == types of merchant == broadly  merchants can be classified into two categories   a wholesale merchant operates in the chain between the producer and retail merchant  typically dealing in large quantities of goods. in other words  a wholesaler does not sell directly to end-users. some wholesale merchants only organize the movement of goods rather than move the goods themselves. a retail merchant or retailer sells merchandise to end-users or consumers (including businesses)  usually in small quantities. a shop-keeper is a retail merchant.however  the term  merchant  is often used in a variety of specialised contexts such as in merchant banker  merchant navy or merchant services.   == history ==   === merchants in antiquity ===  merchants have existed as long as humans have conducted business  trade or commerce.    a merchant class operated in many pre-modern societies. open-air  public markets  where merchants and traders congregated  functioned in ancient babylonia and assyria  china  egypt  greece  india  persia  phoenicia and rome. these markets typically occupied a place in the town s centre. surrounding the market  skilled artisans  such as metal-workers and leather workers  occupied premises in alley ways that led to the open market-place. these artisans may have sold wares directly from their premises  but also prepared goods for sale on market days. in ancient greece markets operated within the agora (open space)  and in ancient rome in the forum. rome s forums included the  forum romanum  the forum boarium and trajan s forum. the forum boarium  one of a series of  fora venalia or food markets  originated  as its name suggests  as a cattle market. trajan s forum was a vast expanse  comprising multiple buildings with shops on four levels. the roman forum was arguably the earliest example of a permanent retail shop-front.in antiquity   exchange involved direct selling through permanent or semi-permanent retail premises such as stall-holders at market places or shop-keepers selling from their own premises or through door-to-door direct sales via merchants or peddlers. the nature of direct selling centred around transactional exchange  where
the goods were on open display  allowing buyers to evaluate quality directly through visual inspection. relationships between merchant and consumer were minimal often playing into public concerns about the quality of produce.  the phoenicians became well known amongst contemporaries as  traders in purple  – a reference to their monopoly over the  purple dye extracted from the murex shell. the phoenicians plied their ships across the mediterranean  becoming a major trading power by the 9th century bce. phoenician merchant traders imported and exported wood  textiles  glass and produce such as wine  oil  dried fruit and nuts. their trading necessitated a network of colonies along the mediterranean coast  stretching from modern-day crete through to tangiers (in present-day morocco) and northward to sardinia. the phoenicians not only traded in tangible goods  but were also instrumental in transporting the trappings of culture. the phoenicians  extensive trade networks necessitated considerable book-keeping and correspondence. in around 1500 bce  the phoenicians developed a  script which was much easier to learn that the pictographic systems used in ancient egypt and mesopotamia. phoenician traders and merchants were largely responsible for spreading their alphabet around the region. phoenician inscriptions have been found in archaeological sites at a number of former phoenician cities and colonies around the mediterranean  such as byblos (in present-day lebanon) and carthage in north africa.  the social status of the merchant class varied across cultures  ranging from high status (the members even eventually achieving titles such as that of merchant prince or nabob) to low status  as in  china  greece and roman cultures  owing to the presumed distastefulness of profiting from  mere  trade rather than from labor or the labor of others as in agriculture and  craftsmanship. the romans defined merchants or traders in a very narrow sense. merchants were those who bought and sold goods  while landowners who sold their own produce were not classed as merchants. being a landowner was a  respectable  occupation. on the other hand  the romans did not consider the activities of merchants  respectable . in the ancient cities of the middle east  where the bazaar was the city s focal point and heartbeat  merchants who worked in bazaar were considered to be among the high-ranking members of the society. in medieval western europe  the christian church  which closely associated merchants  activities with the sin of usury  criticised the merchant class  strongly influencing attitudes towards them.in greco-roman society  merchants typically did not have high social status  though they may have enjoyed great wealth. umbricius scauras  for example  was a manufacturer and trader of fish sauce (also known as garum) in pompeii  circa 35 c.e. his villa  situated in one of the wealthier districts of pompeii  was very large and ornately decorated in a show of substantial personal wealth. mosaic patterns in the floor of his atrium were decorated with images
of amphorae bearing his personal brand and inscribed with quality claims. one of the inscriptions on the mosaic amphora reads  g(ari) f(los) sco[m]/ scauri/ ex offi[ci]/na scau/ri  which translates as  the flower of garum  made of the mackerel  a product of scaurus  from the shop of scaurus . scauras  fish sauce had a reputation for very high quality across the mediterranean  its fame travelled as far away as modern southern france. other notable roman merchants included  marcus julius alexander (16 - 44 ce)  sergius orata (fl. c. 95 bce) and annius plocamus (1st century ce). in the roman world  local merchants served the needs of the wealthier landowners. while the local peasantry  who were generally poor  relied on open-air market places to buy and sell produce and wares  major producers such as the great estates were sufficiently attractive for merchants to call directly at their farm-gates. the very wealthy landowners managed their own distribution  which may have involved exporting.  markets were also important centres of social life  and merchants helped to spread news and gossip.the nature of export markets in antiquity is well documented in ancient sources and in archaeological case-studies. both greek and roman merchants engaged in long-distance trade. a chinese text records that a roman merchant named lun reached southern china in 226 ce. archaeologists have recovered roman objects dating from the period 27 bce to 37 ce from excavation sites as far afield as the kushan and indus ports. the romans sold purple and yellow dyes  brass and iron  they acquired incense  balsam  expensive liquid myrrh and spices from the near east and india  fine silk from china and fine white marble destined for the roman wholesale market from arabia. for roman consumers  the purchase of goods from the east was a symbol of social prestige.   === merchants in the medieval period ===  medieval england and europe witnessed a rapid expansion in trade and the rise of a wealthy and powerful merchant class. blintiff has investigated the early medieval networks of market towns and suggests that by the 12th century there was an upsurge in the number of market towns and the emergence of merchant circuits as traders bulked up surpluses from smaller regional  different day markets and resold them at the larger centralised market towns. peddlers or itinerant merchants filled any gaps in the distribution system. from the 11th century  the crusades helped to open up new trade routes in the near east  while the adventurer and merchant  marco polo stimulated interest in the far east in the 12th and 13th centuries. medieval merchants began to trade in exotic goods imported from distant shores including spices  wine  food  furs  fine cloth (notably silk)  glass  jewellery and many other luxury goods. market towns began to spread across the landscape during the medieval period. merchant guilds began to form during the medieval period. a
fraternity formed by the merchants of tiel in gelderland (in present-day netherlands) in 1020 is believed to be the first example of a guild. the term  guild was first used for gilda mercatoria and referred to body of merchants operating out of st. omer  france in the 11th century. similarly  london s hanse was formed in the 12th century. these guilds controlled the way that trade was to be conducted and codified rules governing the conditions of trade. rules established by merchant guilds were often incorporated into the charters granted to market towns. in the early 12th century  a confederation of merchant guilds  formed out the german cities of lubeck and hamburg  known as  the hanseatic league  came to dominate trade around the baltic sea. by the 13th and 14th centuries  merchant guilds had sufficient resources to have erected guild halls in many major market towns.  during the thirteenth century  european businesses became more permanent and were able to maintain sedentary merchants and a system of agents. merchants specialised in financing  organisation and transport while agents were domiciled overseas and acted on behalf of a principal. these arrangements first appeared on the route from italy to the levant  but by the end of the thirteenth century merchant colonies could be found from paris  london  bruges  seville  barcelona and montpellier. over time these partnerships became more commonplace and led to the development of large trading companies. these developments also triggered innovations such as double-entry book-keeping  commercial accountancy  international banking including access to lines of credit  marine insurance and commercial courier services. these developments are sometimes known as the commercial revolution.luca clerici has made a detailed study of vicenza’s food market during the sixteenth century. he found that there were many different types of merchants operating out of the markets. for example  in the dairy trade  cheese and butter was sold by the members of two craft guilds (i.e.  cheesemongers who were shopkeepers) and that of the so-called ‘resellers’ (hucksters selling a wide range of foodstuffs)  and by other sellers who were not enrolled in any guild.  cheesemongers’ shops were situated at the town hall and were very lucrative. resellers and direct sellers increased the number of sellers  thus increasing competition  to the benefit of consumers. direct sellers  who brought produce from the surrounding countryside  sold their wares through the central market place and priced their goods at considerably lower rates than cheesemongers.  from 1300 through to the 1800s a large number of european chartered and merchant companies were established to exploit international trading opportunities. the company of merchant adventurers of london  chartered in 1407  controlled most of the fine cloth imports while the hanseatic league controlled most of the trade in the baltic sea. a detailed study of european trade between the thirteenth and fifteenth century demonstrates that the european age of discovery acted as a major driver of change. in
1600  goods travelled relatively short distances  grain 5–10 miles  cattle 40–70 miles  wool and wollen cloth 20–40 miles. however  in the years following the opening up of asia and the discovery of the new world  goods were imported from very long distances  calico cloth from india  porcelain  silk and tea from china  spices from india and south-east asia and tobacco  sugar  rum and coffee from the new world.in mesoamerica  a tiered system of traders developed independently. the local markets  where people purchased their daily needs were known as tianguis while pochteca referred to long-distance  professional merchants traders who obtained rare goods and luxury items desired by the nobility. this trading system supported various levels of pochteca – from very high status merchants through to minor traders who acted as a type of peddler to fill in gaps in the distribution system. the spanish conquerors commented on the impressive nature of the local and regional markets in the 15th century. the mexica (aztec) market of tlatelolco was the largest in all the americas and said to be superior to those in europe.   === merchants in the modern era === the modern era is generally understood to refer to period that coincides with the rise of consumer culture in seventeenth and eighteenth century europe. as standards of living improved in the 17th century  consumers from a broad range of social backgrounds began to purchase goods that were in excess of basic necessities. an emergent middle class or bourgeosie stimulated demand for luxury goods and the act of shopping came to be seen as a pleasurable pass-time or form of entertainment.  as britain embarked on colonial expansion  large commercial organisations were much in need of sophisticated information about trading conditions in foreign lands. daniel defoe  a london merchant  published information on trade and economic resources of england  scotland and india. defoe was a prolific pamphleteer and among his many publications are titles devoted to trade including  trade of britain stated  1707  trade of scotland with france  1713  the trade to india critically and calmly considered  1720 and a plan of the english commerce 1731  all pamphlets that were highly popular with contemporary merchants and business houses.eighteenth century merchants  who traded in foreign markets  developed a network of relationships which crossed national boundaries  religious affiliations  family ties  and gender. the historian  vannneste  has argued that a new cosmopolitan merchant mentality based on trust  reciprosity and a culture of communal support developed and helped to unify the early modern world. given that these cosmopolitan merchants were embedded within their societies and participated in the highest level of exchange  they transferred a more outward-looking mindset and system of values to their commercial exchange transactions  and also helped to disseminate a more global awareness to broader society and therefore acted as agents of change for local society. successful 
open-minded cosmopolitan merchants began to acquire a more esteemed social position with the political elites. they were often sought as advisors for high-level political agentsby the eighteenth century  a new type of manufacturer-merchant was emerging and modern business practices were becoming evident. many merchants held showcases of goods in their private homes for the benefit of wealthier clients. samuel pepys  for example  writing in 1660  describes being invited to the home of a retailer to view a wooden jack. mckendrick  brewer and plumb found extensive evidence of eighteenth century english entrepreneurs and merchants using  modern  marketing techniques  including product differentiation  sales promotion and loss leader pricing. english industrialists  josiah wedgewood and matthew boulton  are often portrayed as pioneers of modern mass marketing methods. wedgewood was known to have used marketing techniques such as direct mail  travelling salesmen and catalogues in the eighteenth century. wedgewood also carried out serious investigations into the fixed and variable costs of production and recognised that increased production would lead to lower unit costs. he also inferred that selling at lower prices would lead to higher demand and recognised the value of achieving scale economies in production. by cutting costs and lowering prices  wedgewood was able to generate higher overall profits. similarly  one of wedgewood s contemporaries  matthew boulton  pioneered early mass production techniques and product differentiation at his soho manufactory in the 1760s. he also practiced planned obsolescence and understood the importance of  celebrity marketing  – that is supplying the nobility  often at prices below cost and of obtaining royal patronage  for the sake of the publicity and kudos generated. both wedgewood and boulton staged expansive showcases of their wares in their private residences or in rented halls.eighteenth-century american merchants  who had been operating as importers and exporters  began to specialise in either wholesale or retail roles. they tended not to specialise in particular types of merchandise  often trading as general merchants  selling a diverse range of product types. these merchants were concentrated in the larger cities. they often provided high levels of credit financing for retail transactions.   == in art == elizabeth honig has argued that artists  especially the dutch painters of antwerp  developed a fascination with merchants from the mid-16th century. at this time  the economy was undergoing profound changes – capitalism emerged as the dominant social organisation replacing earlier modes of production. merchants were importing produce from afar – grain from the baltic  textiles from england  wine from germany and metals from various countries. antwerp was the centre of this new commercial world. the public began to distinguish between two types of merchant  the meerseniers which were local merchants including bakers  grocers  sellers of dairy products and stall-holders  and the koopman  which were a new  emergent class of trader who dealt in goods or credit on a large scale. with the rise of a european merchant class
 this distinction was necessary to separate the daily trade that the general population understood from the rising ranks of traders who operated on a world stage and were seen as quite distant from everyday experience. the wealthier merchants also had the means to commission artworks with the result that individual merchants and their families became important subject matter for artists. for instance  hans holbein  the younger painted a series of portraits of hanseatic merchants working out of london s steelyard in the 1530s. these included including georg giese of danzig  hillebrant wedigh of cologne  dirk tybis of duisburg  hans of antwerp  hermann wedigh  johann schwarzwald  cyriacus kale  derich born and derick berck. paintings of groups of merchants  notably officers of the merchant guilds  also became subject matter for artists and documented the rise of important mercantile organisations. in recent art  dutch photographer loes heerink spend hours on bridges in hanoi to take pictures of vietnamese street merchants. she published a book called merchants in motion  the art of vietnamese street vendors.                                                                                  == in architecture == although merchant halls were known in antiquity  they fell into disuse and were not reinvented until europe s medieval period. during the 12th century  powerful guilds which controlled the way that trade was conducted were established and were often incorporated into the charters granted to market towns. by the 13th and 14th centuries  merchant guilds had acquired sufficient resources to erect guild halls in many major market towns. many buildings have retained the names derived from their former use as the home or place of business of merchants                                   == see also ==   == references and sources == references sourcesthrupp  sylvia l. (1989). the merchant class of medieval london  1300-1500. university of michigan press. isbn 978-0-472-06072-6.   == external links ==  the dictionary definition of merchant at wiktionary  media related to merchants at wikimedia commons  quotations related to merchant at wikiquote
a plumber is tradesperson who specializes in installing and maintaining systems used for potable (drinking) water  sewage and drainage in plumbing systems.   == history == the word   plumber  dates from the roman empire. the latin  for lead is plumbum.  roman roofs used lead in conduits and drain pipes and some were also covered with lead  lead was also used for piping and for making baths. in medieval times anyone who worked with lead was referred to as a plumber as can be seen from an extract of workmen fixing a roof in westminster palace and were referred to as plumbers  to gilbert de westminster  plumber  working about the roof of the pantry of the little hall  covering it with lead  and about various defects in the roof of the little hall . thus a person with expertise in working with lead was first known as a plumbarius which was later shortened to plumber.   == plumbing activities ==  years of training and/or experience are  needed to become a skilled plumber  some jurisdictions also require that plumbers be licensed. common plumbing tasks and skills   reading drawings  and specifications to determine layout of water supply  waste  and venting systems detecting faults in plumbing appliances and systems  and correctly diagnosing their causes installing  repairing and maintaining domestic  commercial  and industrial plumbing fixtures and systems locating and marking positions for pipe connections  passage holes  and fixtures in walls and floors measuring  cutting  bending  and threading pipes using hand and power tools or machines joining pipes and fittings together using soldering techniques  compression fittings  threaded fittings  and push-on fittings. testing pipes for leaks using air and water pressure gauges awareness of legal regulations and safety issues ensuring safety standards and building regulations are met.   === united states === each state and locality may have its own licensing and taxing schemes for plumbers. some states license journeyman and master plumbers separately  while others license only master plumbers. to become licensed  plumbers must meet standards for training and experience  and in most cases  pass a certification exam.  there is no federal law establishing licenses for plumbers.   === canada === in canada  licensing requirements differ by province  however the provinces have pooled resources to develop an interprovincial program guide that developed and maintains apprenticeship training standards across all provinces. the red seal program  formally known as the interprovincial standards red seal program  is a program that sets common standards to assess the skills of tradespeople across canada.  the red seal  when affixed to a provincial or territorial trade certificate  indicates that a tradesperson has demonstrated the knowledge required for the national standard in that trade.   === united kingdom === national vocational qualifications (nvq) remained the main form of plumbing qualification until they were superseded in 2008 by
the qualification and credit framework (qcf) and then again into the national qualifications frameworks in the united kingdom in 2015. the terms nvq and svq (scottish vocational qualification) are still widely used.plumbers in the united kingdom are required to pass level 2 and level 3 vocational requirements of the city and guilds of london institute. there are several regulatory bodies in the united kingdom providing accredited plumbing qualifications  including city and guilds of london institute and pearson plc.   === ireland === in ireland  a 4-year apprenticeship plus qualification exam was necessary for someone to practice professionally. accreditation of businesses is of great help in order to show their credibility and experience in the job. offering emergency call out services is an edge among competitors and a huge factor to consider for people looking for an emergency plumber in dublin on in any area in ireland.   == dangers == there are many types of dangers to a plumber. some of them are strains and sprains  cuts and lacerations  bruises and  contusions  fractures  burns and scalds  foreign bodies in the eye  and hernias. working at height  confined spaces and asbestos are all on site dangers that plumbers can face.   === infectious disease risks === plumbers risk infections when dealing with human waste when repairing sewage systems. microbes can be excreted in the feces or vomit of the sufferer onto the toilet or sewage pipes. human waste can contain infectious diseases such as cholera  typhoid  hepatitis  polio  cryptosporidiosis  ascariasis  and schistosomiasis.   == other uses == the term  white house plumbers  was a popular name given to the covert white house special investigations unit established on july 24  1971 during the presidency of richard nixon. their job was to plug intelligence  leaks  in the u.s. government relating to the vietnam war (i.e. the pentagon papers)  hence the term  plumbers .   == notable plumbers == michael jordan john braden (politician) trevor stronge john calley (engineer) don cameron (victorian politician) frank courtnay thomas crapper martin patrick durkin tom finney joseph-achille francoeur colin furze philip haas (inventor) george jennings niamh kindlon leslie mcmahon george meany mike o mara (politician) shawn nelson (plumber) harry patch joe the plumber – during the 2008 us presidential election campaign  samuel joe wurzelbacher questioned barack obama s proposed tax plan. the republican mccain-palin campaign later applied  joe the plumber  as a metaphor for middle-class americans. william j. spencer leonard susskind richard trethewey alphonse verville orlando zapata   == see also == pipefitter piping   == references ==
engineers  as practitioners of engineering  are professionals who invent  design  analyze  build and test machines  complex systems  structures and materials to fulfil functional objectives and requirements while considering the limitations imposed by practicality  regulation  safety and cost. the word engineer (latin ingeniator) is derived from the latin words ingeniare ( to create  generate  contrive  devise ) and ingenium ( cleverness ).  the foundational qualifications of an engineer typically include a four-year bachelor s degree in an engineering discipline  or in some jurisdictions  a master s degree in an engineering discipline plus four to six years of peer-reviewed professional practice (culminating in a project report or thesis) and passage of engineering board examinations.  the work of engineers forms the link between scientific discoveries and their subsequent applications to human and business needs and quality of life.   == definition == in 1961  the conference of engineering societies of western europe and the united states of america defined  professional engineer  as follows  a professional engineer is competent by virtue of his/her fundamental education and training to apply the scientific method and outlook to the analysis and solution of engineering problems. he/she is able to assume personal responsibility for the development and application of engineering science and knowledge  notably in research  design  construction  manufacturing  superintending  managing and in the education of the engineer. his/her work is predominantly intellectual and varied and not of a routine mental or physical character. it requires the exercise of original thought and judgement and the ability to supervise the technical and administrative work of others. his/her education will have been such as to make him/her capable of closely and continuously following progress in his/her branch of engineering science by consulting newly published works on a worldwide basis  assimilating such information and applying it independently. he/she is thus placed in a position to make contributions to the development of engineering science or its applications. his/her education and training will have been such that he/she will have acquired a broad and general appreciation of the engineering sciences as well as thorough insight into the special features of his/her own branch. in due time he/she will be able to give authoritative technical advice and to assume responsibility for the direction of important tasks in his/her branch.   == roles and expertise ==   === design === engineers develop new technological solutions. during the engineering design process  the responsibilities of the engineer may include defining problems  conducting and narrowing research  analyzing criteria  finding and analyzing solutions  and making decisions. much of an engineer s time is spent on researching  locating  applying  and transferring information. indeed  research suggests engineers spend 56% of their time engaged in various information behaviours  including 14% actively searching for information.engineers must weigh different design choices on their merits and choose the solution that best matches the requirements and needs. their
crucial and unique task is to identify  understand  and interpret the constraints on a design in order to produce a successful result.   === analysis ===  engineers apply techniques of engineering analysis in testing  production  or maintenance. analytical engineers may supervise production in factories and elsewhere  determine the causes of a process failure  and test output to maintain quality. they also estimate the time and cost required to complete projects. supervisory engineers are responsible for major components or entire projects. engineering analysis involves the application of scientific analytic principles and processes to reveal the properties and state of the system  device or mechanism under study. engineering analysis proceeds by separating the engineering design into the mechanisms of operation or failure  analyzing or estimating each component of the operation or failure mechanism in isolation  and recombining the components. they may analyze risk.many engineers use computers to produce and analyze designs  to simulate and test how a machine  structure  or system operates  to generate specifications for parts  to monitor the quality of products  and to control the efficiency of processes.   === specialization and management ===  most engineers specialize in one or more engineering disciplines. numerous specialties are recognized by professional societies  and each of the major branches of engineering has numerous subdivisions. civil engineering  for example  includes structural and transportation engineering and materials engineering include ceramic  metallurgical  and polymer engineering. mechanical engineering cuts across just about every discipline since its core essence is applied physics. engineers also may specialize in one industry  such as motor vehicles  or in one type of technology  such as turbines or semiconductor materials.several recent studies have investigated how engineers spend their time  that is  the work tasks they perform and how their time is distributed among these. research suggests that there are several key themes present in engineers  work  technical work (i.e.  the application of science to product development)  social work (i.e.  interactive communication between people)  computer-based work and information behaviours. among other more detailed findings  a recent work sampling study found that engineers spend 62.92% of their time engaged in technical work  40.37% in social work  and 49.66% in computer-based work. furthermore  there was considerable overlap between these different types of work  with engineers spending 24.96% of their time engaged in technical and social work  37.97% in technical and non-social  15.42% in non-technical and social  and 21.66% in non-technical and non-social. engineering is also an information-intensive field  with research finding that engineers spend 55.8% of their time engaged in various different information behaviours  including 14.2% actively seeking information from other people (7.8%) and information repositories such as documents and databases (6.4%).the time engineers spend engaged in such activities is also reflected in the competencies required in engineering roles. in addition to engineers’ core technical competence  research has also demonstrated the critical
nature of their personal attributes  project management skills  and cognitive abilities to success in the role.   == types of engineers ==  there are many branches of engineering  each of which specializes in specific technologies and products. typically  engineers will have deep knowledge in one area and basic knowledge in related areas. for example  mechanical engineering curricula typically includes introductory courses in electrical engineering  computer science  materials science  metallurgy  mathematics  and software engineering. when developing a product  engineers typically work in interdisciplinary teams. for example  when building robots an engineering team will typically have at least three types of engineers. a mechanical engineer would design the body and actuators. an electrical engineer would design the power systems  sensors  electronics  embedded software in electronics  and control circuitry. finally  a software engineer would develop the software that makes the robot behave properly. engineers that aspire to management engage in further study in business administration  project management and organizational or business psychology. often engineers move up the management hierarchy from managing projects  functional departments  divisions and eventually ceos of a multi-national corporation.   == ethics ==  engineers have obligations to the public  their clients  employers  and the profession. many engineering societies have established codes of practice and codes of ethics to guide members and inform the public at large. each engineering discipline and professional society maintains a code of ethics  which the members pledge to uphold. depending on their specializations  engineers may also be governed by specific statute  whistleblowing  product liability laws  and often the principles of business ethics. some graduates of engineering programs in north america may be recognized by the iron ring or engineer s ring  a ring made of iron or stainless steel that is worn on the little finger of the dominant hand. this tradition began in 1925 in canada with the ritual of the calling of an engineer  where the ring serves as a symbol and reminder of the engineer s obligations to the engineering profession. in 1972  the practice was adopted by several colleges in the united states including members of the order of the engineer.   == education ==  most engineering programs involve a concentration of study in an engineering specialty  along with courses in both mathematics and the physical and life sciences. many programs also include courses in general engineering and applied accounting. a design course  often accompanied by a computer or laboratory class or both  is part of the curriculum of most programs. often  general courses not directly related to engineering  such as those in the social sciences or humanities  also are required. accreditation is the process by which engineering programs are evaluated by an external body to determine if applicable standards are met. the washington accord serves as an international accreditation agreement for academic engineering degrees  recognizing the substantial equivalency in
the standards set by many major national engineering bodies. in the united states  post-secondary degree programs in engineering are accredited by the accreditation board for engineering and technology.   == regulation ==  in many countries  engineering tasks such as the design of bridges  electric power plants  industrial equipment  machine design and chemical plants  must be approved by a licensed professional engineer. most commonly titled professional engineer is a license to practice and is indicated with the use of post-nominal letters  pe or p.eng. these are common in north america  as is european engineer (eur ing) in europe. the practice of engineering in the uk is not a regulated profession but the control of the titles of chartered engineer (ceng) and incorporated engineer (ieng) is regulated. these titles are protected by law and are subject to strict requirements defined by the engineering council uk. the title ceng is in use in much of the commonwealth. many skilled and semi-skilled trades and engineering technicians in the uk call themselves engineers. a growing movement in the uk is to legally protect the title  engineer  so that only professional engineers can use it  a petition was started to further this cause. in the united states  engineering is a regulated profession whose practice and practitioners are licensed and governed by law. licensure is generally attainable through combination of education  pre-examination (fundamentals of engineering exam)  examination (professional engineering exam)  and engineering experience (typically in the area of 5+ years). each state tests and licenses professional engineers. currently  most states do not license by specific engineering discipline  but rather provide generalized licensure  and trust engineers to use professional judgment regarding their individual competencies  this is the favoured approach of the professional societies. despite this  at least one of the examinations required by most states is actually focused on a particular discipline  candidates for licensure typically choose the category of examination which comes closest to their respective expertise. in the united states  an  industrial exemption  allows businesses to employ employees and call them an  engineer  as long as such individuals are under the direct supervision and control of the business entity and function internally related to manufacturing (manufactured parts) related to the business entity  or work internally within an exempt organization. such person does not have the final authority to approve  or the ultimate responsibility for  engineering designs  plans  or specifications that are to be incorporated into fixed works  systems  or facilities on the property of others or made available to the public. these individuals are prohibited from offering engineering services directly to the public or other businesses  or engage in practice of engineering unless the business entity is registered with the state s board of engineering  and the practice is carried on or supervised directly only by engineers licensed to engage in the practice of engineering. in some instances  some positions
 such as a “sanitation engineer”  does not have any basis in engineering sciences. in canada  engineering is a self-regulated profession. the profession in each province is governed by its own engineering association. for instance  in the province of british columbia an engineering graduate with four or more years of post graduate experience in an engineering-related field and passing exams in ethics and law will need to be registered by the association for professional engineers and geoscientists (apegbc) in order to become a professional engineer and be granted the professional designation of p.eng allowing one to practice engineering. in continental europe  latin america  turkey  and elsewhere the title is limited by law to people with an engineering degree and the use of the title by others is illegal. in italy  the title is limited to people who both hold an engineering degree and have passed a professional qualification examination (esame di stato). in portugal  professional engineer titles and accredited engineering degrees are regulated and certified by the ordem dos engenheiros. in the czech republic  the title  engineer  (ing.) is given to people with a (masters) degree in chemistry  technology or economics for historical and traditional reasons. in greece  the academic title of  diploma engineer  is awarded after completion of the five-year engineering study course and the title of  certified engineer  is awarded after completion of the four-year course of engineering studies at a technological educational institute (tei).   == perception ==  the perception and definition of the term  engineer  varies across countries and continents.   === uk === british school children in the 1950s were brought up with stirring tales of  the victorian engineers  chief among whom were brunel  stephenson  telford  and their contemporaries. in the uk   engineering  has more recently been styled as an industry sector consisting of employers and employees loosely termed  engineers  who included semi-skilled trades. however  many industry practitioners prefer to reserve the term  engineer  to describe a university-educated practitioner of ingenuity represented by the chartered (or incorporated) engineer qualifications. however  a large proportion of the uk public still thinks of  engineers  as skilled tradespeople or even semi-skilled tradespeople with a high school education. also  uk skilled and semi-skilled tradespeople style themselves as  engineers . this has created confusion in the eyes of some members of the public to understand what professional engineers actually do  from fixing car engines  television sets and refrigerators to designing and managing the development of aircraft  spacecraft  power stations  infrastructure  and other complex technological systems.   === france === in france  the term  ingénieur  (engineer) is not a protected title and can be used by anyone  even by those who do not possess an academic degree.however  the title  ingénieur diplomé  (graduate engineer) is an official academic title that is
protected by the government and is associated with the  diplôme d ingénieur  which is one of the most prestigious academic degrees in france. anyone misusing this title in france can be fined a large sum and jailed  as it is reserved for graduates of french engineering grandes écoles that provide highly intensive training in science and engineering. among such institutions  the most renown (and hardest to gain admission) are ecole centrale paris (centrale)  ecole des mines de paris (mines paristech)  ecole nationale supérieure d arts et métiers  ecole polytechnique  and ecole des ponts paristech. engineering schools which were created during the french revolution have a special reputation among the french people  as they helped to make the transition from a mostly agricultural country of late 18th century to the industrially developed france of the 19th century. a great part of 19th-century france s economic wealth and industrial prowess was created by engineers that have graduated from ecole centrale paris  ecole des mines de paris  or ecole polytechnique. this was also the case after the wwii when france had to be rebuilt. before the  réforme rené haby  in the 1970s  it was very difficult to be admitted to such schools  and the french ingénieurs were commonly perceived as the nation s elite (hence the term  faire les grandes écoles  in language of older people). however  after the haby reform and a string of further reforms (modernization plans of french universities)  several engineering schools were created which can be accessed with relatively lower competition  and this reputation as being part of the french elite now applies to those from  top  engineering schools for engineers  école nationale d administration (ena) for managers or politicians and école normale supérieure (ens) for researchers in science and humanities. engineers are less highlighted in current french economy as industry provides less than a quarter of the gdp.   === north america === in the united states and canada  engineering is a regulated profession whose practice and practitioners are licensed and governed by law. licensed professional engineers are referred to as p.eng in canada and pe in the united states. a 2002 study by the ontario society of professional engineers revealed that engineers are the third most respected professionals behind doctors and pharmacists.in ontario  and all other canadian provinces  the  title  engineer is protected by law and any non-licensed individual or company using the title is committing a legal offense  and can get fined. companies usually prefer not to use the title except for license holders because of liability reasons  for instance  if the company filed a lawsuit and the judge  investigators  or lawyers found that the company is using the word engineer for non-licensed employees this could be used by opponents to hinder the company s efforts.   === asia and africa === in the indian subcontinent  russia  middle east  africa
 and china  engineering is one of the most sought after undergraduate courses  inviting thousands of applicants to show their ability in highly competitive entrance examinations. in egypt  the educational system makes engineering the second-most-respected profession in the country (after medicine)  engineering colleges at egyptian universities require extremely high marks on the general certificate of secondary education (arabic  الثانوية العامة‎ al-thānawiyyah al-`āmmah)—on the order of 97 or 98%—and are thus considered (along with the colleges of medicine  natural science  and pharmacy) to be among the  pinnacle colleges  (كليات القمة kullīyāt al-qimmah). in the philippines and filipino communities overseas  engineers who are either filipino or not  especially those who also profess other jobs at the same time  are addressed and introduced as engineer  rather than sir/madam in speech or mr./mrs./ms. (g./gng./bb. in filipino) before surnames. that word is used either in itself or before the given name or surname.   === corporate culture === in companies and other organizations  there is sometimes a tendency to undervalue people with advanced technological and scientific skills compared to celebrities  fashion practitioners  entertainers  and managers. in his book  the mythical man-month  fred brooks jr says that managers think of senior people as  too valuable  for technical tasks and that management jobs carry higher prestige. he tells how some laboratories  such as bell labs  abolish all job titles to overcome this problem  a professional employee is a  member of the technical staff.  ibm maintain a dual ladder of advancement  the corresponding managerial and engineering or scientific rungs are equivalent. brooks recommends that structures need to be changed  the boss must give a great deal of attention to keeping his managers and his technical people as interchangeable as their talents allow.   == see also == building engineer engineer s degree engineers without borders greatest engineering achievements history of engineering list of engineering branches list of engineers list of fictional scientists and engineers washington accord   == references ==   == external links ==   media related to engineers at wikimedia commons
a sailor  seaman  mariner  or seafarer is a person who works aboard a watercraft as part of its crew  and may work in any one of a number of different fields that are related to the operation and maintenance of a ship. the profession of the sailor is old  and the term sailor has its etymological roots in a time when sailing ships were the main mode of transport at sea  but it now refers to the personnel of all watercraft regardless of the mode of transport  and encompasses people who operate ships professionally or recreationally  be it for a military navy or civilian merchant navy. in a navy  there may be further distinctions  sailor may refer to any member of the navy even if they are based on land  while seaman may refer to a specific enlisted rank.   == professional mariners == seafarers hold a variety of professions and ranks  each of which carries unique responsibilities which are integral to the successful operation of an ocean-going vessel. a ship s crew can generally be divided into four main categories  the deck department  the engineering department  the steward s department  and others.   === deck department ===   officer positions in the deck department include but are not limited to  master and his chief  second and third officers. the official classifications for unlicensed members of the deck department are able seaman and ordinary seaman. with some variation  the chief mate is most often charged with the duties of cargo mate. second mates are charged with being the medical officer in case of medical emergency. all three mates each do four-hour morning and afternoon shifts on the bridge  when underway at sea. a common deck crew for a ship includes   (1) captain / master (1) chief officer / chief mate (1) second officer / second mate (1) third officer / third mate (1) boatswain (unlicensed petty officer  qualified member deck dept.) (2) able seamen (unlicensed qualified rating) (2) ordinary seamen (entry-level rating) (0-1) deck cadet / unlicensed trainee navigator / midshipman   === engineering department ===  a ship s engineering department consists of the members of a ship s crew that operates and maintains the propulsion and other systems on board the vessel. marine engineering staff also deal with the  hotel  facilities on board  notably the sewage  lighting  air conditioning and water systems. engineering staff manage bulk fuel transfers  from a fuel-supply barge in port. when underway at sea  the second and third engineers will often be occupied with oil transfers from storage tanks  to active working tanks. cleaning of oil purifiers is another regular task. engineering staff are required to have training in firefighting and first aid. additional duties include maintaining the ship s boats and performing other nautical tasks. engineers play a key role in cargo loading/discharging gear and safety systems  though the
specific cargo discharge function remains the responsibility of deck officers and deck workers. a common engineering crew for a ship includes   (1) chief engineer (1) second engineer / first assistant engineer (1) third engineer / second assistant engineer (1) fourth engineer / third assistant engineer (1) motorman (unlicensed junior engineer  qualified member engine dept.) (2) oiler (unlicensed qualified rating) (2) entry-level rating wiper (0–1) engine cadet / unlicensed trainee engineerusa ships also carry a qualified member of the engine department. other possible positions include motorman  machinist  electrician  refrigeration engineer and tankerman.   === steward s department ===  a typical steward s department for a cargo ship is a chief steward  a chief cook and a steward s assistant. all three positions are typically filled by unlicensed personnel. the chief steward directs  instructs  and assigns personnel performing such functions as preparing and serving meals  cleaning and maintaining officers  quarters and steward department areas  and receiving  issuing  and inventorying stores. the chief steward also plans menus  compiles supply  overtime  and cost control records. the steward may requisition or purchase stores and equipment. galley roles may include baking. a chief steward s duties may overlap with those of the steward s assistant  the chief cook  and other steward s department crewmembers. a person has to have a merchant mariner s document issued by the united states coast guard in the united states merchant marine in order to serve as a chief steward. all chief cooks who sail internationally are similarly documented by their respective countries because of international conventions and agreements. the only time that steward department staff are charged with duties outside the steward department  is during the execution of the fire and boat drill.   === other departments ===  various types of staff officer positions may exist on board a ship  including junior assistant purser  senior assistant purser  purser  chief purser  medical doctor  professional nurse  marine physician assistant and hospital corpsman. these jobs are considered administrative positions and are therefore regulated by certificates of registry issued by the united states coast guard. pilots are also merchant marine officers and are licensed by the coast guard.   === working conditions === mariners spend extended periods at sea. most deep-sea mariners are hired for one or more voyages that last for several months. there is no job security after that. the length of time between voyages varies by job availability and personal preference.the rate of unionization for these workers in the united states is about 36 percent  much higher than the average for all occupations. consequently  merchant marine officers and seamen  both veterans and beginners  are hired for voyages through union hiring halls or directly by shipping companies. hiring halls fill jobs by the length of time the person has been registered at the hall and by their union seniority. hiring halls typically are found in major seaports. at
sea  on larger vessels members of the deck department usually stand watch for 4 hours and are off for 8 hours  7 days a week.mariners work in all weather conditions. working in damp and cold conditions often is inevitable  although ships try to avoid severe storms while at sea. it is uncommon for modern vessels to suffer disasters such as fire  explosion  or a sinking. yet workers face the possibility of having to abandon ship on short notice if it collides with other vessels or runs aground. mariners also risk injury or death from falling overboard and from hazards associated with working with machinery  heavy loads  and dangerous cargo. however  modern safety management procedures  advanced emergency communications  and effective international rescue systems place modern mariners in a much safer position. most newer vessels are air conditioned  soundproofed from noisy machinery  and equipped with comfortable living quarters. these amenities have helped ease the sometimes difficult circumstances of long periods away from home. also  modern communications  email  instant messaging and social media platforms etc.  link modern mariners to their families. nevertheless  some mariners dislike the long periods away from home and the confinement aboard ship. they consequently leave the profession.   === life at sea ===  professional mariners live on the margins of society  with much of their life spent beyond the reach of land. they face cramped  stark  noisy  and dangerous conditions at sea. yet men and women still go to sea. for some  the attraction is a life unencumbered with the restraints of life ashore. seagoing adventure and a chance to see the world also appeal to many seafarers. whatever the calling  those who live and work at sea invariably confront social isolation. findings by the seafarer s international research center indicate a leading cause of mariners leaving the industry is  almost invariably because they want to be with their families . u.s. merchant ships typically do not allow family members to accompany seafarers on voyages. industry experts increasingly recognize isolation  stress  and fatigue as occupational hazards. advocacy groups such as international labor organization  a united nations agency  and the nautical institute seek improved international standards for mariners.  one s service aboard ships typically extends for months at a time  followed by protracted shore leave. however  some seamen secure jobs on ships they like and stay aboard for years. in rare cases  veteran mariners choose never to go ashore when in port. further  the quick turnaround of many modern ships  spending only a matter of hours in port  limits a seafarer s free-time ashore. moreover  some seafarers entering u.s. ports from a watch list of 25 countries deemed high-risk face restrictions on shore leave due to security concerns in a post 9/11 environment. however  shore leave restrictions while in u.s. ports impact american seamen as well. for example  the international organization of
masters  mates & pilots notes a trend of u.s. shipping terminal operators restricting seamen from traveling from the ship to the terminal gate. further  in cases where transit is allowed  special  security fees  are at times assessed. such restrictions on shore leave coupled with reduced time in port by many ships translate into longer periods at sea. mariners report that extended periods at sea living and working with shipmates who for the most part are strangers takes getting used to. at the same time  there is an opportunity to meet people from a wide range of ethnic and cultural backgrounds. recreational opportunities have improved aboard some u.s. ships  which may feature gyms and day rooms for watching movies  swapping sea stories  and other activities. and in some cases  especially tankers  it is made possible for a mariner to be accompanied by members of his family. however  a mariner s off duty time at sea is largely a solitary affair  pursuing hobbies  reading  writing letters  and sleeping. internet accessibility is fast coming to the sea with the advent of cheap satellite communication  mainly from inmarsat. the availability of affordable roaming sim cards with online top-up facilities have also contributed to improved connection with friends and family at home.   == notable mariners ==  erik the red and his son leif erikson were the first notable mariners known to sail in a primitive  partly man powered vessel across the arctic and the north atlantic ocean. barbarossa hayrettin pasha (turkish  barbaros hayrettin paşa or hızır hayrettin paşa  also hızır reis before being promoted to the rank of pasha and becoming the kaptan-ı derya (fleet admiral) of the ottoman navy) (c. 1478 – 4 july 1546) was an ottoman admiral who dominated the mediterranean for decades. he was born on the island of lesbos/ mytilini and died in istanbul  the ottoman capital. merchant seamen have gone on to make their mark on the world in a number of interesting ways.  traian băsescu  who started his career as a third mate in 1976 was the president of romania from 2004 to 2014.  arthur phillip joined the merchant navy in 1751 and 37 years later founded the city of sydney  australia.  merchant mariner douglass north went from seaman to navigator to winner of the 1993 nobel prize in economics. jimmy carter went on to become the 39th president of the united states after service in the us navy. members of the british merchant navy have won the distinguished service cross and have had careers taking them from  deck boy peter  to air marshal sir beresford peter torrington horsley kcb  cbe  lvo  afc. canadian merchant seamen have won the victoria cross and the medal of honor. american merchant seamen have won the medal of honor in the korean war and vietnam war  and one went on to become the  father of the american navy.
  one doesn t have to look far to find merchant seamen who became war heroes in scotland  france  new zealand  peru  or denmark. since world war ii  a number of merchant seamen have become notorious criminals. american william colepaugh was convicted as a nazi spy in world war ii and fritz sauckel was convicted as a nazi war criminal. briton duncan scott-ford was hanged for treachery in world war ii. george hennard was an american mass murderer who claimed 24 victims on a rampage at luby s cafeteria in killeen  texas. and perry smith s own murderous rampage was made famous in truman capote s non-fiction novel in cold blood.  mariners are well represented in the visual arts. french pilot s assistant paul gauguin later became a leading post-impressionist painter and pioneered modern art s synthetist style. american seaman haskell wexler later won two academy awards  the latter for a biography of his shipmate woody guthrie. british merchant navy member ken russell later directed films such as tommy  altered states and the lair of the white worm. merchant seaman johnny craig was already a working comic book artist before he joined up  but ernie schroeder wouldn t start drawing comics until after returning home from world war ii. merchant sailors have also made a splash in the world of sport. in football  with fred blackburn in england and the likes of dan devine and heisman trophy winner frank sinkwich in the u.s. in track and field  american seamen cornelius johnson and jim thorpe both won olympic medals  though thorpe didn t get his until 30 years after his death.  seamen jim bagby  jr. and charlie keller went on to major league baseball. drew bundini brown was muhammad ali s assistant trainer and cornerman  and joe gold went on to make his fortune as the bodybuilding and fitness guru of gold s gym. other sporting notables include  dutchman henk de velde known for sailing solo around the world  and briton matthew webb who was the first person to swim the english channel without the use of artificial aid. irish merchant navy member kevin mcclory spent 14 days in a lifeboat and later went on to write the james bond movies never say never again and thunderball. members of the american beat movement allen ginsberg  jack kerouac  bob kaufman  and herbert huncke were all merchant mariners. it is perhaps not surprising that the writers of moby dick  the american practical navigator  and two years before the mast were merchant mariners.  it might be surprising that the writers of borat  a hard day s night  and cool hand luke were. a number of u.s. merchant mariners from world war ii later played well known television characters. the list includes milburn drysdale on the beverly hillbillies  archie bunker on all in the family  peter falk on columbo  jim rockford on the rockford files  steve
mcgarret on hawaii five-o  uncle jesse duke on the dukes of hazzard and cheyenne bodie on cheyenne.   == other uses ==  an ancient term  the word  sailor  has come to mean many things. sailor may refer to   a person who is under sail and not on a vessel with motorized power of any kind in the royal navy  a person who goes out sailing  boating or yachting  a person who practices the art of controlling the motion of a sailing ship or sailboat across a body of water  a member of a military naval force  anyone on a boat  anyone from a recruit to an admiral in a navy or coast guard  members of the deck department as opposed to members of other departments in the merchant navy.   == see also ==   == notes ==   == references ==   == external links == survey of water transport occupations seafarer fatigue  the cardiff research programme sailor at etymology online the telegraph  sea no evil  the life of a modern sailor
a fisherman or fisher is someone who captures fish and other animals from a body of water  or gathers shellfish.worldwide  there are about 38 million commercial and subsistence fishermen and fish farmers. fishermen may be professional or recreational and may be both men or women. fishing has existed as a means of obtaining food since the mesolithic period.   == history ==     fishing has existed as a means of obtaining food since the mesolithic period. fishing had become a major means of survival as well as a business venture.fishing and the fisherman have also influenced ancient egyptian religion  mullets were worshipped as a sign of the arriving flood season. bastet was often manifested in the form of a catfish. in ancient egyptian literature  the process that amun used to create the world is associated with the tilapia s method of mouth-brooding.   == commerce ==  according to the fao  there were about 39 million fishers in countries producing more than 200 000 tonnes in 2012  which is nearly 140% the number in 1995. the total fishery production of 66 million tonnes equated to an average productivity of 3.5 tonnes per person.most of this growth took place in asian countries  where four-fifths of world fishers and fish farmers dwell.most fishermen are men involved in offshore and deep-sea fisheries. women fish in some regions inshore from small boats or collect shellfish and seaweed. in many artisanal fishing communities  women are responsible for making and repairing nets  post-harvest processing and marketing.   == recreation ==  recreational fishing is fishing for pleasure or competition. it can be contrasted with commercial fishing  which is fishing for economic profit  or subsistence fishing  which is fishing for survival. the most common form of recreational fishing is done with a rod  reel  line  hooks and any one of a wide range of baits. lures are frequently used in place of bait. some people make handmade lures  including plastic lures and artificial flies. the practice of catching or attempting to catch fish with a hook is called angling. when angling  it is sometimes expected or required that the fish be caught and released. big-game fishing is fishing from boats to catch large open-water species such as tuna  sharks and marlin. noodling and trout tickling are also recreational activities.   == communities ==  for some communities  fishing provides not only a source of food and work but also community and cultural identity.   == safety issues ==  the fishing industry is hazardous for fishermen. between 1992 and 1999  us commercial fishing vessels averaged 78 deaths per year. the main contributors to fatalities are  inadequate preparation for emergencies poor vessel maintenance and inadequate safety equipment lack of awareness of or ignoring stability issues.many fishermen  while accepting that fishing is dangerous  staunchly defend their independence. many proposed laws and additional regulation to increase safety have been defeated because
fishermen oppose them.alaska s commercial fishermen work in one of the world s harshest environments. many of the hardships they endure include isolated fishing grounds  high winds  seasonal darkness  very cold water  icing  and short fishing seasons  where very long work days are the norm. fatigue  physical stress  and financial pressures face most alaska fishermen through their careers. the hazardous work conditions faced by fishermen have a strong impact on their safety. out of 948 work-related deaths that took place in alaska during 1990-2006  one-third (311) occurred to fishermen. this is equivalent to an estimated annual fatality rate of 128/100 000 workers/year. this fatality rate is 26 times that of the overall u.s. work-related fatality rate of approximately 5/100 000 workers/year for the same time period.while the work-related fatality rate for commercial fishermen in alaska is still very high  it does appear to be decreasing  since 1990  there has been a 51 percent decline in the annual fatality rate. the successes in commercial fishing are due in part to the u.s. coast guard implementing new safety requirements in the early 1990s. these safety requirements contributed to 96 percent of the commercial fishermen surviving vessel sinkings/capsizings in 2004  whereas in 1991  only 73 percent survived. while the number of occupational deaths in commercial fishermen in alaska has been reduced  there is a continuing pattern of losing 20 to 40 vessels every year. there are still about 100 fishermen who must be rescued each year from cold alaska waters. successful rescue is still dependent on the expertly trained personnel of the us coast guard search and rescue operations  and such efforts can be hindered by the harshness of seas and the weather. furthermore  the people involved in search and rescue operations are themselves at considerable risk for injury or death during these rescue attempts.   == gallery ==                      == see also == fishing recreational fishing aquaculture fish farming dirty  dangerous and demeaning fishery list of american fishers   == references ==   == further reading == fields  leslie leyland (editor) (2002) out on the deep blue  women  men  and the oceans they fish. st. martin s press. isbn 978-0-312-27726-0 jones  stephen (2001) working thin waters  conversations with captain * lawrence h. malloy  jr. university press of new england. isbn 978-1-58465-103-1   == external links == moore  charles w (1998) did fishermen discover the new world  for those in peril  dangers at sea for fishermen on the east coast of scotland historyshelf.org fisher folk at sea and ashore north east folklore archive  aberdeenshire council. retrieved 9 march 2011.
a soldier is one who fights as part of an army.  a soldier can be a conscripted or volunteer enlisted person  a non-commissioned officer  or an officer.   == etymology == the word soldier derives from the middle english word soudeour  from old french soudeer or soudeour  meaning mercenary  from soudee  meaning shilling s worth or wage  from sou or soud  shilling. the word is also related to the medieval latin soldarius  meaning soldier (literally   one having pay ). these words ultimately derive from the late latin word solidus  referring to an ancient roman coin used in the byzantine empire.   == occupational designations == in most armies use of the word  soldier  has taken on a more general meaning due to the increasing specialization of military occupations that require different areas of knowledge and skill-sets. as a result   soldiers  are referred to by names or ranks which reflect an individual s military occupation specialty arm  service  or branch of military employment  their type of unit  or operational employment or technical use such as  trooper  tanker (a member of tank crew)  commando  dragoon  infantryman  artilleryman  paratrooper  grenadier  ranger  sniper  engineer  sapper  craftsman  signaller  medic  or a gunner.   == other terms == in many countries soldiers serving in specific occupations are referred to by terms other than their occupational name. for example  military police personnel in the british army are known as  red caps  because of the colour of their caps (and berets). infantry are sometimes called  grunts  (in the united states army) or  squaddies  (in the british army)  while u.s. army artillery crews  or  gunners  are sometimes referred to as  redlegs  from the service branch color for artillery. u.s. soldiers are often called  g.i.s  (short for the term  general issue ).  french marine infantry are called marsouins (french  porpoises) because of their amphibious role. military units in most armies have nicknames of this type  arising either from items of distinctive uniform  some historical connotation or rivalry between branches or regiments.   == career soldiers and conscripts == some soldiers  such as conscripts or draftees  serve a single limited term. others choose to serve until retirement  then they receive a pension and other benefits. in the united states  military members can retire after 20 years. in other countries  the term of service is 30 years  hence the term  30-year man .   === women as soldiers === according to the united nations  10-30% of all soldiers worldwide are women. 70-90% are men.    == see also == airman marine sailor   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to soldier at wikimedia commons
military personnel are members of the state s armed forces. their roles  pay  and obligations differ according to their military branch (army  navy  marines  air force  and sometimes coast guard)  rank (officer  non-commissioned officer  or enlisted recruit)  and their military task when deployed on operations and on exercise.   == overview == those who serve in a typical large land force are soldiers  making up an army. those who serve in seagoing forces are seamen or sailors  and their branch is a navy or coast guard. marines serve in a marine corps. in the 20th century  the development of powered flight aircraft prompted the development of air forces  serviced by airmen and women. designated leaders of military personnel are officers. these include commissioned officers  warrant officers and non-commissioned officers (ncos). for naval forces  non-commissioned officers are referred to as petty officers. organizations other than state armed forces include military personnel  such as paramilitary organizations and non-state armed groups.   == demographics ==  most personnel at the start of their military career are young adults. for example  in 2013 the average age of a united states army soldier beginning initial training was 20.7 years. historically  the use of children under the age of 18 for military purposes has been widespread – see children in the military – but has been in decline in the 21st century. according to child soldiers international  as of 2017 approximately two-thirds of states worldwide had committed to restrict military recruitment to adults  while 50 states were still recruiting personnel aged 16 or 17  including most of the world s major military powers.most personnel are male. the proportion of female personnel varies internationally  for example  it is approximately 3% in india  10% in the uk  13% in sweden  16% in the us  and 27% in south africa. many state armed forces that recruit women bar them from ground close combat roles (roles that would require them to kill at close quarters). compared with male personnel and female civilians  female personnel face substantially higher risks of sexual harassment and sexual violence  according to british  canadian  and us research.personnel who join as officers tend to be upwardly-mobile young adults from age 18. most enlisted personnel have a childhood background of relative socio-economic deprivation. for example  after the us suspended conscription in 1973   the military disproportionately attracted african american men  men from lower-status socioeconomic backgrounds  men who had been in nonacademic high school programs  and men whose high school grades tended to be low . as an indication of the socio-economic background of british army personnel  in 2015 three-quarters of its youngest recruits had the literacy skills normally expected of an 11-year-old or younger  and 7% had a reading age of 5–7.   == recruitment ==  military personnel may be conscripted (recruited by compulsion under the law)
or recruited by attracting civilians to join the armed forces. in states that do not rely entirely on conscription  the process of attracting children and young people to military employment begins in their early years by means of  for example   visits to primary and secondary schools  military schools and youth organizations such as cadet forces  advertising across television  radio  cinema  online including social media  the press  billboards  brochures and leaflets  and merchandising  and recruitment stalls (e.g. air shows  military amusement parks such as patriot park in russia  national days and armed forces days). bespoke recruitment videogames and association of military life with action films  a former head of recruitment for the british army  colonel (latterly brigadier) david allfrey  explained the british approach in 2007 our new model is about raising awareness  and that takes a ten-year span. it starts with a seven-year-old boy seeing a parachutist at an air show and thinking   that looks great.  from then the army is trying to build interest by drip  drip  drip. once they are old enough to apply  candidates for military employment typically apply online or at a recruitment centre. many eligibility criteria normally apply  which may be related to age  nationality  height and weight (body mass index)  medical history  psychiatric history  illicit drug use  criminal record  academic results  proof of identity  satisfactory references  and whether any tattoos are visible. a minimum standard of academic attainment may be required for entry  for certain technical roles  or for entry to train for a leadership position as a commissioned officer. candidates who meet the criteria will normally also undergo a medical examination  aptitude test  and fitness assessment and interview. most state armed forces that enlist minors (persons under the age of 18) are required by law to obtain the informed consent of one or both parents or legal guardians before their child s enlistment can take place. in practice  consent is indicated on a form  which parents/guardians sign. once enlistment has taken place  recruits are subject to military terms of service and begin their initial training.  some  who actively oppose military recruitment practices in the belief that they are misleading  harmful or immoral  engage in counter-recruitment activity.   == initial training ==  military personnel must be prepared to perform tasks that in civilian life would be highly unusual or absent. in particular  they must be capable of injuring and killing other people  and of facing mortal danger without fleeing. this is achieved in initial training  a physically and psychologically intensive process which resocializes recruits for the unique nature of military demands.according to an expert in military training methods  lt col. dave grossman  initial training uses four conditioning techniques  role modeling  classical conditioning  operant conditioning  and brutalization. for example
 throughout initial training   individuality is suppressed (e.g. by shaving the head of new recruits  issuing uniforms  denying privacy  and prohibiting the use of first names)  daily routine is tightly controlled (e.g. recruits must make their beds  polish boots  and stack their clothes in a certain way  and mistakes are punished)  continuous stressors deplete psychological resistance to the demands of their instructors (e.g. depriving recruits of sleep  food  or shelter  shouting insults and giving orders intended to humiliate)  and frequent punishments serve to condition group conformity and discourage poor performance. the disciplined drill instructor is presented as a role model of the ideal soldier.in conditions of continuous physical and psychological stress  the trainee group normally forms a bond of mutual loyalty  commonly experienced as an emotional commitment. it has been called a  we-feeling  and helps to commit recruits to their military organisation.throughout their initial training  recruits are repeatedly instructed to stand  march  and respond to orders in a ritual known as foot drill  which trains recruits to obey orders without hesitation or question. according to finnish army regulations  for example  the close-order drill   is essential for the esprit de corps and cohesion for battlefield conditions  gets the recruits used to instinctive obedience and following the orders  enables large units to be marched and moved in an orderly manner  and creates the basis for action in the battlefield.in order to ensure that recruits will kill if ordered to do so  they are taught to objectify (dehumanize) their opponent as an ‘enemy target’ to ‘be engaged’  which will ‘fall when hit’. they are also taught the basic skills of their profession  such as military tactics  first aid  managing their affairs in the field  and the use of weaponry and other equipment. training  is designed to test and improve the physical fitness of recruits  although the heavy strain on the body also leads to a rate of injury.   == terms of service == recruits enter a binding contract of service  which may differ according to rank  military branch  and whether the employment is full-time or part-time.   === minimum service period === full-time military employment normally requires a minimum period of service of several years  between two and six years is typical of armed forces in australia  the uk and the us  for example  depending on role  branch  and rank. the exception to this rule is a short discharge window  which opens after the first few weeks of training and closes a few months later  and allows recruits to leave the armed force as of right.part-time military employment  known as reserve service  allows a recruit to maintain a civilian job while training under military discipline for a minimum number of days per year in return for a financial bounty. reserve recruits may
be called out to deploy on operations to supplement the full-time personnel complement. after leaving the armed forces  for a fixed period (between four and six years is normal in the uk and us  for example)  former recruits may remain liable for compulsory return to full-time military employment in order to train or deploy on operations.   === military law === military law introduces offenses not recognized by civilian courts  such as absence without leave (awol)  desertion  political acts  malingering  behaving disrespectfully  and disobedience (see  for example  offences against military law in the united kingdom). penalties range from a summary reprimand to imprisonment for several years following a court martial. certain fundamental rights are also restricted or suspended  including the freedom of association (e.g. union organizing) and freedom of speech (speaking to the media). military personnel in some countries have a right of conscientious objection if they believe an order is immoral or unlawful  or cannot in good conscience carry it out.   === posting and deployment === personnel may be posted to bases in their home country or overseas  according to operational need  and may be deployed from those bases on exercises or operations anywhere in the world. the length of postings and deployments are regulated. in the uk  for example  a soldier is expected to be on deployment for no more than six months in every 30 months. these regulations may be waived at times of high operational tempo  however.   === perks === perks of military service typically include adventurous training  subsidised accommodation  meals and travel  and a pension. some armed forces also subsidise recruits  education before  during and/or after military service  examples are the st jean military college in canada  the welbeck defence sixth form college in the uk  and the gi bill arrangements in the u.s. conditions for participation normally apply  including a minimum period of formal military employment.   == appearance ==  while on duty  military personnel are normally required to wear a military uniform  normally showing their name  rank and military branch.   == see also == military recruitment recruit training women in the military children in the military transgender people and military service conscientious objector conscription military specialism   == references ==   == external links ==  the dictionary definition of personnel at wiktionary
a photographer (the greek φῶς (phos)  meaning  light  and γραφή (graphê)  meaning  drawing  writing  together meaning  drawing with light ) is a person who makes photographs.   == duties and types of photographers ==  as in other arts  the definitions of amateur and professional are not entirely categorical. an amateur photographer takes snapshots for pleasure to remember events  places or friends with no intention of selling the images to others. a professional photographer is likely to take photographs for a session and image purchase fee  by salary or through the display  resale or use of those photographs.a professional photographer may be an employee  for example of a newspaper  or may contract to cover a particular planned event such as a wedding or graduation  or to illustrate an advertisement.  others  like fine art photographers  are freelancers  first making an image and then licensing or making printed copies of it for sale or display.  some workers  such as crime scene photographers  estate agents  journalists and scientists  make photographs as part of other work.  photographers who produce moving rather than still pictures are often called cinematographers  videographers or camera operators  depending  on the commercial context. the term professional may also imply preparation  for example  by academic study or apprenticeship by the photographer in pursuit of photographic skills. a hallmark of a professional is often that they invest in continuing education through associations. many associations offer the opportunity to test and exhibit acumen in order to attain credentials such as certified professional photographer (cpp) or master photographer. while there is no compulsory registration requirement for professional photographer status  operating a business requires having a business license in most cities and counties. similarly  having commercial insurance is required by most venues if photographing a wedding or a public event. photographers who operate a legitimate business can provide these items. photographers can be categorized based on the subjects they photograph. some photographers explore subjects typical of paintings such as landscape  still life  and portraiture. other photographers specialize in subjects unique to photography  including sports photography  street photography  documentary photography  fashion photography  wedding photography  war photography  photojournalism  aviation photography and commercial photography. it is worth noting that the type of work commissioned will have pricing associated with the image s usage.   === photographers ===                == selling photographs ==  the exclusive right of photographers to copy and use their products is protected by copyright. countless industries purchase photographs for use in publications and on products. the photographs seen on magazine covers  in television advertising  on greeting cards or calendars  on websites  or on products and packages  have generally been purchased for this use  either directly from the photographer or through an agency
that represents the photographer. a photographer uses a contract to sell the  license  or use of his or her photograph with exact controls regarding how often the photograph will be used  in what territory it will be used (for example u.s. or u.k. or other)  and exactly for which products. this is usually referred to as usage fee and is used to distinguish from production fees (payment for the actual creation of a photograph or photographs). an additional contract and royalty would apply for each additional use of the photograph. the contract may be for only one year  or other duration.  the photographer usually charges a royalty as well as a one-time fee  depending on the terms of the contract. the contract may be for non-exclusive use of the photograph (meaning the photographer can sell the same photograph for more than one use during the same year) or for exclusive use of the photograph (i.e. only that company may use the photograph during the term). the contract can also stipulate that the photographer is entitled to audit the company for determination of royalty payments. royalties vary depending on the industry buying the photograph and the use  for example  royalties for a photograph used on a poster or in television advertising may be higher than for use on a limited run of brochures.  a royalty is also often based on the size at which the photo will be used in a magazine or book  and cover photos usually command higher fees than photos used elsewhere in a book or magazine. photos taken by a photographer while working on assignment are often work for hire belonging to the company or publication unless stipulated otherwise by contract. professional portrait and wedding photographers often stipulate by contract that they retain the copyright of their photos  so that only they can sell further prints of the photographs to the consumer  rather than the customer reproducing the photos by other means. if the customer wishes to be able to reproduce the photos themselves  they may discuss an alternative contract with the photographer in advance before the pictures are taken  in which a larger up front fee may be paid in exchange for reprint rights passing to the customer. there are major companies who have maintained catalogues of stock photography and images for decades  such as getty images and others. since the turn of the 21st century many online stock photography catalogues have appeared that invite photographers to sell their photos online easily and quickly  but often for very little money  without a royalty  and without control over the use of the photo  the market it will be used in  the products it will be used on  time duration  etc.  commercial photographers may also promote their work to advertising and editorial art buyers via printed and online marketing vehicles.   == photo sharing == many people upload their photographs to social networking websites and
other websites  in order to share them with a particular group or with the general public. those interested in legal precision may explicitly release them to the public domain or under a free content license. some sites  including wikimedia commons  are punctilious about licenses and only accept pictures with clear information about permitted use.   == references ==   == external links ==  the dictionary definition of photographer at wiktionary  media related to photographers at wikimedia commons
paparazzi (us    uk    italian  [papaˈrattsi]  singular  masculine paparazzo or feminine paparazza) are independent photographers who take pictures of high-profile people  such as actors  athletes  politicians  and other celebrities  typically while subjects go about their usual life routines. paparazzi tend to make a living by selling their photographs to media outlets that focus on tabloid journalism and sensationalism (such as gossip magazines).   == description == paparazzi tend to be independent contractors  unaffiliated with mainstream media organizations  and photos taken are usually done so by taking advantage of opportunities when they have sightings of high-profile people they are tracking. some experts have described the behavior of paparazzi as synonymous with stalking  and anti-stalking bills in many countries address the issue by reducing harassment of public figures and celebrities  especially with their children. some public figures and celebrities have expressed concern at the extent to which paparazzi go to invade their personal space. the filing and receiving of judicial support for restraining orders against paparazzi has increased  as have lawsuits with judgments against them.   == famous paparazzi == walter santesso portrays paparazzo in the 1960 film la dolce vita  marking the character as the eponym of the word paparazzi.ron galella is most known for suing jacqueline kennedy onassis after the former first lady ordered her secret service agents to destroy galella’s camera and film following an encounter in new york city s central park in the early 1970s.   == etymology == a news photographer named paparazzo (played by walter santesso in the 1960 film la dolce vita directed by federico fellini) is the eponym of the word paparazzi. in his book word and phrase  robert hendrickson writes that fellini took the name from an italian dialect word that describes a particularly annoying noise  that of a buzzing mosquito. as fellini said in his interview to time magazine   paparazzo ... suggests to me a buzzing insect  hovering  darting  stinging.  those versions of the word s origin are sometimes contested. for example  in the abruzzo dialect spoken by ennio flaiano  co-scriptwriter of la dolce vita  the term paparazzo refers to the local clam  venerupis decussata  and is also used as a metaphor for the shutter of a camera lens. further  in an interview with fellini s screenwriter flaiano  he said the name came from the book sulla riva dello jonio (1957)  a translation by italian poet margherita guidacci of by the ionian sea  a 1901 travel narrative in southern italy by victorian writer george gissing. he further states that either fellini or flaiano opened the book at random  saw the name of a restaurant owner  coriolano paparazzo  and decided to use it for the photographer. this story is further documented by a variety of gissing scholars and in the book a sweet and glorious land. revisiting the ionian sea. by the
late 1960s  the word  usually in the italian plural form paparazzi  had entered english as a generic term for intrusive photographers. a person who has been photographed by the paparazzi is said to have been  papped .   === in other languages === a transliteration of paparazzi is used in several languages that do not use the latin alphabet  including japanese  korean  ukrainian  russian  thai and hebrew. chinese uses 狗仔隊  meaning  puppy squad . khmer uses អ្នកប្រមាញ់រូប (anak bramanh roub).   == legality == due to the reputation of paparazzi as a nuisance  several states and countries restrict their activities by passing laws and curfews  and by staging events in which paparazzi are specifically not allowed to take photographs. in the united states  celebrity news organizations are protected by the first amendment.to protect the children of celebrities  california passed a new bill in september 2013. the purpose of the bill is to stop paparazzi from taking pictures of children in a harassing manner  regardless of who their parents are. this law increased the penalty on harassment and the penalty for harassment of children.   === injunctions ===  in 1972  paparazzo photographer ron galella sued jacqueline kennedy onassis after the former first lady ordered her secret service agents to destroy galella s camera and film following an encounter in new york city s central park. kennedy counter-sued claiming harassment. the trial lasted three weeks and became a groundbreaking case regarding photojournalism and the role of paparazzi. in galella v. onassis  kennedy obtained a restraining order to keep galella 150 feet (46 m) away from her and her children. the restriction later was dropped to 25 feet (7.6 m). the trial is a focal point in smash his camera  a 2010 documentary film by director leon gast. in 1997  diana  princess of wales and dodi fayed were killed in a limousine crash as their driver was speeding  trying to escape paparazzi. an inquest jury investigated the involvement of paparazzi in the incident  and although several paparazzi were taken into custody  no one was convicted. the official inquests into the accident attributed the causes to the speed and manner of driving of the mercedes  as well as the following vehicles  and the impairment of the judgment of the mercedes driver  henri paul  through alcohol.in 1999  the oriental daily news of hong kong was found guilty of  scandalizing the court  an extremely rare law that the newspaper s conduct would undermine confidence in the administration of justice. the charge was brought after the newspaper had published abusive articles challenging the judiciary s integrity and accusing it of bias in a lawsuit the paper had instigated over a photo of a pregnant faye wong. the paper had also arranged for a  dog team  (slang for paparazzi in the chinese language) to track a judge for 72 hours  to provide
the judge with first-hand experience of what paparazzi do.time magazine s style & design special issue in 2005 ran a story entitled  shooting star  in which mel bouzad  one of the top paparazzi in los angeles at the time  claimed to have made us$150 000 for a picture of ben affleck and jennifer lopez in georgia after their breakup.  if i get a picture of britney and her baby  bouzad claimed   i ll be able to buy a house in those hills (above sunset boulevard).  paparazzi author peter howe told time that  celebrities need a higher level of exposure than the rest of us so it is a two-way street. the celebrities manipulate.  in 2006  daniella cicarelli went through a scandal when a paparazzo caught video footage of her having sex with her boyfriend on a beach in spain  which was posted on youtube. after fighting in the court  it was decided in her favor  causing youtube to be blocked in brazil. this caused major havoc among brazilians  including threatening a boycott against mtv brasil unless cicarelli was fired from that company. the block only lasted a few days  and cicarelli was not dismissed. the legal action backfired as the court decided she had no expectation of privacy by having sex in a public location.the e  network program celebrities uncensored used often-confrontational footage of celebrities made by paparazzi. following the publication of photographs showing catherine  duchess of cambridge sunbathing whilst topless at her husband s cousin s (viscount linley s) holiday home in france  it was announced on september 14  2012  that the royal couple were to launch legal action against the french edition of closer magazine. it was the first time that a senior royal has sued in a court outside the uk. the reason cited for the legal action is that the duchess had a right of privacy whilst at the home—the magazine responded that the pictures had been taken from the public highway. the injunction was granted september 18  2012 and the publishers of the magazine were ordered not to publish the photographs in france and not to sell the images. the publishers were also ordered to hand over the original material of the published pictures under threat of a €10 000 fine for every day delay in doing so.in the united kingdom  sienna miller  amy winehouse  and lily allen won injunctions that prevent the paparazzi from following them and gathering outside their houses. miller was awarded £53 000.in 2013  rapper kanye west  facing assault charges for attacking a photojournalist  said he would fight to get the law changed so celebrities can profit from the paparazzi s work.   == references ==   == external links ==  the dictionary definition of paparazzi at wiktionary the paparazzi at aenigma
cheerleading is an activity in which the participants (called  cheerleaders ) cheer for their team as a form of encouragement. it can range from chanting slogans to intense physical activity. it can be performed to motivate sports teams  to entertain the audience  or for competition. competitive routines typically range anywhere from one to three minutes  and contain components of tumbling  dance  jumps  cheers  and stunting. cheerleading originated in the united states  and remains predominantly in america  with an estimated 1.5 million participants in all-star cheerleading. the global presentation of cheerleading was led by the 1997 broadcast of  espn s international cheerleading competition  and the worldwide release of the 2000 film bring it on. due in part to this recent exposure  there are now an estimated 100 000 participants scattered around the globe in australia  canada  china  colombia  finland  france  germany  japan  the netherlands  new zealand  and the united kingdom.   == history ==   === before organized cheerleading === cheerleading began during the late 18th century with the rebellion of male students. after the american revolutionary war  students experienced harsh treatment from teachers. in response to faculty s abuse  college students violently acted out. the undergraduates began to riot  burn down buildings located on their college campuses  and assault faculty members. as a more subtle way to gain independence  however  students invented and organized their own extracurricular activities outside their professors  control. this brought about american sports  beginning first with collegiate teams.in the 1860s  students from great britain began to cheer and chant in unison for their favorite athletes at sporting events. soon  that gesture of support crossed overseas to america.on november 6  1869  the united states witnessed its first intercollegiate football game. it took place between princeton and rutgers university  and marked the day the original  sis boom rah  cheer was shouted out by student fans.   === beginning of organized cheer ===  organized cheerleading started as an all-male activity. as early as 1877  princeton university had a  princeton cheer  documented in the february 22  1877  march 12  1880  and november 4  1881  issues of the daily princetonian. this cheer was yelled from the stands by students attending games  as well as by the athletes themselves. the cheer   hurrah  hurrah  hurrah  tiger  s-s-s-t  boom  a-h-h-h  remains in use with slight modifications today  where it is now referred to as the  locomotive .princeton class of 1882 graduate thomas peebles moved to minnesota in 1884. he transplanted the idea of organized crowds cheering at football games to the university of minnesota.  the term  cheer leader  had been used as early as 1897  with princeton s football officials having named three students as cheer leaders  thomas
 easton  and guerin from princeton s classes of 1897  1898  and 1899  respectively  on october 26  1897. these students would cheer for the team also at football practices  and special cheering sections were designated in the stands for the games themselves for both the home and visiting teams.it was not until 1898 that university of minnesota student johnny campbell directed a crowd in cheering  rah  rah  rah  ski-u-mah  hoo-rah  hoo-rah  varsity  varsity  varsity  minn-e-so-tah  making campbell the very first cheerleader. november 2  1898 is the official birth date of organized cheerleading. soon after  the university of minnesota organized a  yell leader  squad of six male students  who still use campbell s original cheer today.  in 1903  the first cheerleading fraternity  gamma sigma  was founded.   === female participation === in 1923  at the university of minnesota  women were permitted to participate in cheerleading.  however  it took time for other schools to follow. in the late 1920s  many school manuals and newspapers that were published still referred to cheerleaders as  chap   fellow  and  man .  women cheerleaders were overlooked until the 1940s. in the 1940s  collegiate men were drafted for world war ii  creating the opportunity for more women to make their way onto sporting event sidelines. as noted by kieran scott in ultimate cheerleading   girls really took over for the first time.  an overview written on behalf of cheerleading in 1955 explained that in larger schools   occasionally boys as well as girls are included  and in smaller schools   boys can usually find their place in the athletic program  and cheerleading is likely to remain solely a feminine occupation.  during the 1950s  cheerleading in america also increased in popularity. by the 1960s  some began to consider cheerleading a feminine extracurricular for boys  and by the 1970s  girls primarily cheered at public school games. however  this did not stop its growth. cheerleading could be found at almost every school level across the country  even pee wee and youth leagues began to appear.in 1975  it was estimated by a man named randy neil that over 500 000 students actively participated in american cheerleading from elementary school to the collegiate level. he also approximated that ninety-five percent of cheerleaders within america were female. since 1973  cheerleaders have started to attend female basketball and other all-female sports as well.as of 2005  overall statistics show around 97% of all modern cheerleading participants are female  although at the collegiate level  cheerleading is co-ed with about 50% of participants being male.   === cheerleading firsts === in 1948  lawrence  herkie  herkimer  of dallas  texas  a former cheerleader at southern methodist university  formed the national cheerleaders association (nca) in order
to hold clinics for cheerleading. in 1949  the nca held its first clinic in huntsville  texas  with 52 girls in attendance. herkimer contributed many firsts to cheerleading  the founding of the cheerleader & danz team cheerleading uniform supply company  inventing the herkie jump (where one leg is bent towards the ground as if kneeling and the other is out to the side as high as it will stretch in toe-touch position)  and creating the  spirit stick . by the 1960s  college cheerleaders began hosting workshops across the nation  teaching fundamental cheer skills to high-school-age girls. in 1965  fred gastoff invented the vinyl pom-pom  which was introduced into competitions by the international cheerleading foundation (icf  now the world cheerleading association  or wca). organized cheerleading competitions began to pop up with the first ranking of the  top ten college cheerleading squads  and  cheerleader all america  awards given out by the icf in 1967. in 1978  america was introduced to competitive cheerleading by the first broadcast of collegiate cheerleading championships on cbs.   === professional cheerleading ===  in the 1950s  the formation of professional cheerleading started. the first recorded cheer squad in national football league (nfl) history was for the baltimore colts. professional cheerleaders put a new perspective on american cheerleading. women were selected for two reasons  visual sex appeal  and the ability to dance. women were exclusively chosen because men were the targeted marketing group.  the dallas cowboys cheerleaders soon gained the spotlight with their revealing outfits and sophisticated dance moves  debuting in the 1972–1973 season  but were first widely seen in super bowl x (1976). these pro squads of the 1970s established cheerleaders as  american icons of wholesome sex appeal.   by 1981  a total of seventeen nation football league teams had their own cheerleaders. the only teams without nfl cheerleaders at this time were new orleans  new york  detroit  cleveland  denver  minnesota  pittsburg  san francisco  and san diego. professional cheerleading eventually spread to soccer and basketball teams as well.   === advancements and traditions of cheerleading ===  the 1980s saw the beginning of modern cheerleading  adding difficult stunt sequences and gymnastics into routines. all-star teams popped up  and with them  the creation of the united states all-star federation (usasf). espn first broadcast the national high school cheerleading competition nationwide in 1983. cheerleading organizations such as the american association of cheerleading coaches and advisors (aacca)  founded in 1987  started applying universal safety standards to decrease the number of injuries and prevent dangerous stunts  pyramids  and tumbling passes from being included in the cheerleading routines. in 2003  the national council for spirit safety and education (ncsse) was formed to offer safety training for youth  school  all-star  and college coaches. the ncaa requires college cheer coaches to successfully complete a nationally recognized safety-training program. the
ncsse or aacca certification programs are both recognized by the ncaa.even with its athletic and competitive development  cheerleading at the school level has retained its ties to its spirit leading traditions. cheerleaders are quite often seen as ambassadors for their schools  and leaders among the student body. at the college level  cheerleaders are often invited to help at university fundraisers and events.cheerleading is very closely associated with american football and basketball. sports such as association football (soccer)  ice hockey  volleyball  baseball  and wrestling will sometimes sponsor cheerleading squads. the icc twenty20 cricket world cup in south africa in 2007 was the first international cricket event to have cheerleaders. the florida marlins were the first major league baseball team to have a cheerleading team. debuting in 2003  the  marlin mermaids  gained national exposure  and have influenced other mlb teams to develop their own cheer/dance squads.   === evolution === competitive cheerleading is scored subjectively based on components including  but not limited to  the cheer itself   dance/choreography  pyramids  stunting  and tumbling. in order to prevent injuries  there are certain rules that cheerleading teams have to follow according to their level (high school  all-star  or college). according to the encyclopedia of sports medicine  there are two purposes of cheerleading - to cheer on the sidelines for other athletes  and to be a  highly skilled competing athlete. along with this evolution to the sport s structure  there have been significant advancements made to the typical cheerleading uniform. what began as the classic sweater and mid-calf pleated skirt uniform has now come to incorporate materials that allow for stretch and flexibility. uniform changes are a result of the changing culture since the 1930s. cheerleading may seem like a light-hearted activity to some  but injuries that can come from practice or a competition can be severe if the athlete is not properly trained. there have been many catastrophic injuries from cheer  especially from tumbling and stunting. because of the lack of studies on injuries in competitive cheerleading  many injuries that happen could be avoided. most studies in sports medicine pertaining to cheerleading are focused on whether it is a sport or not.   == types of teams in the united states today ==   === school-sponsored === most american middle schools  high schools  and colleges have organized cheerleading squads. many colleges offer cheerleading scholarships for students. a cheerleading team may compete locally  regionally  or nationally  as well as cheer for sporting events and encourage audience participation.  cheerleading is quickly becoming a year-round activity  starting with tryouts during the spring semester of the preceding school year. teams may attend organized summer cheerleading camps and practices to improve skills and create routines for competition. student cheerleaders compete with recreational-style routine at competitions year-round. teams practice intensely for competition and perform a routine no longer than 2 minutes and 30 seconds. like other
school-level athletes  teams compete to win league titles  and move on to bigger competitions with the hopes of reaching a national competition. the advantages to a school squad versus an all-star squad is cheering at various sporting events. the tryout process can sometimes take place over a multiple day period. the cheerleading coach will arrange for a cheerleading clinic  during which basic materials are taught or reviewed before the final day of tryouts. the clinic gives returning cheerleaders and new cheerleaders an equal chance of becoming familiar with the material. skills that are necessary to be a cheerleader include jumps  tumbling  motions  and dance ability. tryouts often take place during the spring  so that the coach has the squad chosen in time to attend summer camp as a team.   ==== middle school ====  middle school cheerleading evolved shortly after high school squads were created. in middle school  cheerleading squads serve the same purpose  and follow the same rules as high school squads.  squads cheer for basketball teams  football teams  and other sports teams in their school. squads also perform at pep rallies and compete against other local schools from the area.  cheerleading in middle school sometimes can be a two-season activity  fall and winter. however  many middle school cheer squads will go year-round like high school squads. middle school cheerleaders use the same cheerleading movements as their older counterparts  yet they perform less extreme stunts. these stunts range from preps  thigh stands  and extensions  to harder one-legged stunts.   ==== high school ====  in high school  there are usually two squads per school  varsity and a junior varsity.  high school cheerleading contains aspects of school spirit as well as competition. these squads have become part of a year-round cycle. starting with tryouts in the spring  year-round practice  cheering on teams in the fall and winter  and participating in cheerleading competitions. most squads practice at least three days a week for about two hours each practice during the summer. many teams also attend separate tumbling sessions outside of practice. during the school year  cheerleading is usually practiced five- to six-days-a-week. during competition season  it often becomes seven days with practice twice a day sometimes. the school spirit aspect of cheerleading involves cheering  supporting  and  pumping up  the crowd at football games  basketball games  and even at wrestling meets. along with this  they perform at pep rallies  and bring school spirit to  other students. in may 2009  the national federation of state high school associations released the results of their first true high school participation study. they estimated that the number of high school cheerleaders from public high schools is around 394 700.there are different cheerleading organizations that put on competitions  some of the major ones include state and regional competitions. many high schools will often host cheerleading competitions  bringing
in ihsa judges. the regional competitions are qualifiers for national competitions  such as the uca (universal cheerleaders association) in orlando  florida every year. the competition aspect of cheerleading can be very enduring  styles and rules change every year  making it important and difficult to find the newest and hottest routines. most teams have a professional choreographer that choreographs their routine in order to ensure they are not breaking rules or regulations. for a list of rules  visit aacca (american association of cheerleading coaches and administrators). all high school coaches are required to attend an ihsa rules meeting at the beginning of the season. this ensures their knowledge of changed rules and their compliance with these rules.   === college ===  most american universities have a cheerleading squad to cheer for football  basketball  volleyball  and soccer. most college squads tend to be large coed although in recent years  all-girl and small coed college squads have increased rapidly. college squads perform more difficult stunts which include pyramids  as well as flipping and twisting basket tosses. not only do college cheerleaders cheer on the other sports at their university  many teams at universities compete with other schools at either uca college nationals or nca college nationals. this requires the teams to make a 2-minute 30 seconds that is full of tumbling  stunting  basket tosses  and pyramids. winning these competitions are very prestigious accomplishments and is seen as another national title for most schools.   === youth league/athletic association ===  organizations that sponsor youth cheer teams usually sponsor either youth league football or basketball teams as well. this allows for the two  under the same sponsor  to be intermingled. both teams have the same mascot name and the cheerleaders will perform at their football or basketball games. examples of such sponsors include pop warner and pasco police athletic league (ppal). the ymca (young men s christian association) is also a well-known sponsor for youth cheerleading leagues.   === all-star === during the early 1980s  cheerleading squads not associated with a school or sports leagues  whose main objective was competition  began to emerge. the first organization to call themselves all-stars and go to competitions were the q94 rockers from richmond  virginia  founded in 1982.  all-star teams competing prior to 1987 were placed into the same divisions as teams that represented schools and sports leagues. in 1986  the national cheerleaders association (nca) addressed this situation by creating a separate division for teams lacking a sponsoring school or athletic association  calling it the all-star division and debuting it at their 1987 competitions. as the popularity of this type of team grew  more and more of them were formed  attending competitions sponsored by many different organizations and companies  each using its own set of rules  regulations  and divisions. this situation became a concern to gym owners because the inconsistencies caused coaches to keep their routines in
a constant state of flux  detracting from time that could be better utilized for developing skills and providing personal attention to their athletes. more importantly  because the various companies were constantly vying for a competitive edge  safety standards had become more and more lax. in some cases  unqualified coaches and inexperienced squads were attempting dangerous stunts as a result of these expanded sets of rules.the usasf was formed in 2003 by the competition companies to act as the national governing body for all star cheerleading and to create a standard set of rules and judging standards to be followed by all competitions sanctioned by the federation  ultimately leading to the cheerleading worlds. the usasf hosted the first cheerleading worlds on april 24  2004. in 2009  the first all-level worlds was held. it included teams from all levels  with each winner continuing to the online championships  where teams from across the nation competed to win the worlds title. at the same time  cheerleading coaches from all over the country organized themselves for the same rule making purpose  calling themselves the national all star cheerleading coaches congress (naccc). in 2005  the naccc was absorbed by the usasf to become their rule making body. in late 2006  the usasf facilitated the creation of the international all-star federation (iasf).  as of 2012  all-star cheerleading as sanctioned by the usasf involves a squad of 6–36 females and/or males. all-star differs from sideline cheerleading because all-star focuses on performing  while sideline cheers for others sport such as football or basketball. all-star is competitive teams that perform a routine for the purpose of entertainment against other teams  typically in the same divisions  to try to win. the squad prepares year-round for many different competition appearances  but they actually perform only for up to 2½ minutes during their team s routines. the numbers of competitions a team participates in varies from team to team  but generally  most teams tend to participate in eight to twelve competitions a year. these competitions include locals  which are normally taken place in school gymnasiums or local venues  nationals  hosted in big venues all around the u.s. with national champions  and the cheerleading worlds  taken place at disney world in orlando  florida. during a competition routine  a squad performs carefully choreographed stunting  tumbling  jumping  and dancing to their own custom music. teams create their routines to an eight-count system and apply that to the music so that the team members execute the elements with precise timing and synchronization. there are many different organizations that host their own state and national competitions. some major companies include  universal spirit  americheer  cheersport  planet spirit  eastern cheer and dance association  and the jam brands. this means that many gyms within the same area could be state and national champions for the same year and never have competed against each other. currently 
there is no system in place that awards only one state or national title. judges at the competition watch closely for illegal moves from the group or any individual member. here  an illegal move is something that is not allowed in that division due to difficulty and/or safety restrictions. they look out for deductions  or things that go wrong  such as a dropped stunt. they also look for touch downs in tumbling for deductions. more generally  judges look at the difficulty and execution of jumps  stunts and tumbling  synchronization  creativity  the sharpness of the motions  showmanship  and overall routine execution. all-star cheerleaders are placed into divisions  which are grouped based upon age  size of the team  gender of participants  and ability level. the age levels vary from under 4 year of age to 18 years and over. the divisions used by the usasf/iasf are currently tiny  mini  youth  junior  junior international  junior coed  senior  senior coed  special needs  and open international. it originally began with  all girl  teams and later co-ed teams began to gain popularity. that being said  the all-girl squad remains the most prevalent.if a team places high enough at selected usasf/iasf sanctioned national competitions  they could be included in the cheerleading worlds and compete against teams from all over the world  as well as receive money for placing. each team receives a bid from another cheerleading company and goes in the name of that company. one must get a bid from a company in order to compete at the cheerleading worlds. for example  a team could get a bid from cheersport  and they compete as a team representing that company. cheerleading companies give out three types of bids to go to cheerleading worlds  full paid bid  partial bid  or an un-paid bid. the cheerleading worlds are only for teams that are level 5 and up.   === professional ===  professional cheerleaders and dancers cheer for sports such as football  basketball  baseball  wrestling  or hockey. there are only a small handful of professional cheerleading leagues around the world  some professional leagues include the nba cheerleading league  the nfl cheerleading league  the cfl cheerleading league  the mls cheerleading league  the mlb cheerleading league  and the nhl ice dancers. although professional cheerleading leagues exist in multiple countries  there are no olympic teams.in addition to cheering at games and competing  professional cheerleaders also  as teams  can often do a lot of philanthropy and charity work  modeling  motivational speaking  television performances  and advertising.   == associations  federations  and organizations ==  americheer  americheer was founded in 1987 by elizabeth rossetti. it is the parent company to ameridance and eastern cheer and dance association. in 2005  americheer became one of the founding members of the nlcc. this
means that americheer events offer bids to the u.s. finals  the final destination. americheer international championship competition is held every march at the walt disney world resort in orlando  florida. international cheer union (icu)  established on april 26  2004  the icu is recognized by the sportaccord as the world governing body of cheerleading and the authority on all matters with relation to it. including participation from its 105-member national federations reaching 3.5 million athletes globally  the icu continues to serve as the unified voice for those dedicated to cheerleading s positive development around the world. following a positive vote by the sportaccord general assembly on may 31  2013  in saint petersburg  the international cheer union (icu) became sportaccord s 109th member  and sportaccord s 93rd international sports federation to join the international sports family. in accordance with the sportaccord statutes  the icu is recognized as the world governing body of cheerleading and the authority on all matters related to it. as of the 2016–17 season  the icu has introduced a junior aged team (12-16) to compete at the cheerleading worlds  because cheerleading is now in provisional status to become a sport in the olympics. for cheerleading to one day be in the olympics  there must be a junior and senior team that competes at the world championships. the first junior cheerleading team that was selected to become the junior national team was eastside middle school  located in mount washington kentucky and will represent the united states in the inaugural junior division at the world championships.the icu holds training seminars for judges and coaches  global events and the world cheerleading championships. the icu is also fully applied to the international olympic committee (ioc) and is compliant under the code set by the world anti-doping agency (wada). international federation of cheerleading (ifc)  established on july 5  1998  the international federation of cheerleading (ifc) is a non-profit federation based in tokyo  japan  and is the world governing body of cheerleading. the ifc objectives are to promote cheerleading worldwide  to spread knowledge of cheerleading  and to develop friendly relations among the member associations and federations. national cheerleaders association  the nca was founded in 1948 by lawrence herkimer. every year  the nca hosts the nca high school cheerleading nationals and the nca all-star cheerleading nationals in dallas  texas. they also host the nca/nda collegiate cheer & dance championship in daytona beach  florida. united spirit association  in 1950  robert olmstead directed his first summer training camp  and usa later sprouted from this. usa s focus is on the game day experience as a way to enhance audience entertainment. this focus led to the first american football half-time shows to reach adolescences from around the world and expose them to american style cheerleading. usa has choreographed material for professional and competitive cheerleaders alike. usa provides competitions for cheerleading squads without prior qualifications needed in order to participate. the organization
also allows the opportunity for cheerleaders to become an all-american  participate in the macy s thanksgiving day parade  and partake in london s new year s day parade and other special events much like uca and nca allow participants to do. universal cheerleaders association  universal cheerleaders association was founded in 1974 by jeff webb. since 1980  uca has hosted the national high school cheerleading championship in walt disney world resort. they also host the national all-star cheerleading championship  and the college cheerleading national championship at walt disney world resort. to qualify for these events  all teams must submit a video. all of these events air on espn.   == competitions and companies == asian thailand cheerleading invitational (atci)  organised by the cheerleading association of thailand (cat) in accordance with the rules and regulations of the international federation of cheerleading (ifc). the atci is held every year since 2009. at the atci  many teams from all over thailand compete  joining them are many invited neighbouring nations who also send cheer squads. cheerleading asia international open championships (caioc)  hosted by the foundation of japan cheerleading association (fjca) in accordance with the rules and regulations of the ifc. the caioc has been a yearly event since 2007. every year  many teams from all over asia converge in tokyo to compete.cheerleading world championships (cwc)  organised by the ifc. the ifc is a non-profit organisation founded in 1998 and based in tokyo  japan. the cwc has been held every two years since 2001  and to date  the competition has been held in japan  the united kingdom  finland  germany  and hong kong. the 6th cwc was held at the hong kong coliseum on november 26–27  2011.icu world championships  the international cheer union currently encompasses 105 national federations from countries across the globe. every year  the icu host the world cheerleading championship. unlike the usasf worlds  this competition uses level 6/ collegiate style rules. countries assemble and send only one team to represent them. national cheerleading championships (ncc)  the ncc is the annual ifc-sanctioned national cheerleading competition in indonesia organised by the indonesian cheerleading community (icc). since ncc 2010  the event is now open to international competition  representing a significant step forward for the icc. teams from many countries such as japan  thailand  the philippines  and singapore participated in the ground breaking event.  nlcc final destination  nation s leading cheer companies is a multi brand company  partnered with other companies such as  americheer/ameridance  american cheer & dance academy  eastern cheer & dance association  and spirit unlimited. every year  starting in 2006  the nlcc hosts the us finals  the final destination of cheerleading and dance. every team that attends must qualify and receive a bid at a partner company s competition. in may 2008  the nlcc and the jam brands announced a partnership to produce the u.s. finals -
final destination. there are nine final destination locations across the country. after the regional events  videos of all the teams that competed are sent to a new panel of judges and rescored to rank teams against those against whom they may never have had a chance to compete. pan-american cheerleading championships (pcc)  the pcc was held for the first time in 2009 in the city of latacunga  ecuador and is the continental championship organised by the pan-american federation of cheerleading (pfc). the pfc  operating under the umbrella of the ifc  is the non-profit continental body of cheerleading whose aim it is to promote and develop cheerleading in the americas. the pcc is a biennial event  and was held for the second time in lima  peru  in november 2010. the jam brands  the jam brands  headquartered in louisville  kentucky  provides products and services for the cheerleading and dance industry. it is made up of approximately 12 different brands that produce everything from competitions to camps to uniforms to merchandise and apparel. jamfest  the original brand of the jam brands  has been around since 1996 and was founded by aaron flaker and emmitt tyler. dan kessler has since become a co-owner of the jam brands along with flaker and tyler. usasf/iasf worlds  many united states cheerleading organizations form and register the not-for-profit entity the united states all star federation (usasf) and also the international all star federation (iasf) to support international club cheerleading and the world cheerleading club championships. the first world cheerleading championships  or cheerleading worlds  were hosted by the usasf/iasf at the walt disney world resort and taped for an espn global broadcast in 2004. this competition is only for all-star/club cheer. only levels junior 5  senior 5  senior open 5  international 5  international open 5  international 6  and international open 6 may attend. teams must receive a bid from a partner company to attend. varsity  partnered with the uca  varsity created the national high school cheerleading championship in 1980. varsity all-star owns or partners with many of the largest cheerleading events in the country.   == title ix sports status == there is a large debate on whether or not cheerleading should be considered a sport for title ix (a portion of the united states education amendments of 1972 forbidding discrimination under any education program on the basis of sex) purposes. supporters consider cheerleading  as a whole  a sport  citing the heavy use of athletic talents while critics see it as a physical activity because a  sport  implies a competition among all squads and not all squads compete  along with subjectivity of competitions where—as with gymnastics  diving  and figure skating—scores are assessed based on human judgment and not an objective goal or measurement of time.on january 27  2009  in a lawsuit involving an accidental injury sustained during a cheerleading practice  the wisconsin supreme court
ruled that cheerleading is a full-contact sport in that state  not allowing any participants to be sued for accidental injury. in contrast  on july 21  2010  in a lawsuit involving whether college cheerleading qualified as a sport for purposes of title ix  a federal court  citing a current lack of program development and organization  ruled that it is not a sport at all.   == dangers of cheerleading == cheerleading carries the highest rate of catastrophic injuries to girl athletes in sports. the risks of cheerleading were highlighted when kristi yamaoka  a cheerleader for southern illinois university  suffered a fractured vertebra when she hit her head after falling from a human pyramid.  she also suffered from a concussion  and a bruised lung.  the fall occurred when yamaoka lost her balance during a basketball game between southern illinois university and bradley university at the savvis center in st. louis on march 5  2006.  the fall gained  national attention  because yamaoka continued to perform from a stretcher as she was moved away from the game.  yamaoka has since made a full recovery.the accident caused the missouri valley conference to ban its member schools from allowing cheerleaders to be  launched or tossed and from taking part in formations higher than two levels  for one week during a women s basketball conference tournament  and also resulted in a recommendation by the ncaa that conferences and tournaments do not allow pyramids two and one half levels high or higher  and a stunt known as basket tosses  during the rest of the men s and women s basketball season.  on july 11  2006  the bans were made permanent by the aacca rules committee   the committee unanimously voted for sweeping revisions to cheerleading safety rules  the most major of which restricts specific upper-level skills during basketball games. basket tosses  2½ high pyramids  one-arm stunts  stunts that involve twisting or flipping  and twisting tumbling skills may be performed only during halftime and post-game on a matted surface and are prohibited during game play or time-outs.  another major cheerleading accident was the death of lauren chang. chang died on april 14  2008 after competing in a competition where her teammate had kicked her so hard in the chest that her lungs collapsed.of the united states  2.9 million female high school athletes  only 3% are cheerleaders  yet cheerleading accounts for nearly 65% of all catastrophic injuries in girls  high school athletics. the ncaa does not recognize cheerleading as a collegiate sport  there are no solid numbers on college cheerleading  yet when it comes to injuries  67% of female athlete injuries at the college level are due to cheerleading mishaps. another study found that between 1982 and 2007  there were 103 fatal  disabling  or serious injuries recorded among female high school athletes  with the vast majority (67)
occurring in cheerleading.in the early 2000s  cheerleading was considered one of the most dangerous school activities. the main source of injuries comes from stunting  also known as pyramids. these stunts are performed at games and pep rallies  as well as competitions. sometimes competition routines are focused solely around the use of difficult and risky stunts. these stunts usually include a flyer (the person on top)  along with one or two bases (the people on the bottom)  and one or two spotters in the front and back on the bottom. the most common cheerleading related injury is a concussion. 96% of those concussions are stunt related. others injuries are  sprained ankles  sprained wrists  back injuries  head injuries (sometimes concussions)  broken arms  elbow injuries  knee injuries  broken noses  and broken collarbones. sometimes  however  injuries can be as serious as whiplash  broken necks  broken vertebrae  and death.the journal pediatrics has reportedly said that the number of cheerleaders suffering from broken bones  concussions  and sprains has increased by over 100 percent between the years of 1990 and 2002  and that in 2001  there were 25 000 hospital visits reported for cheerleading injuries dealing with the shoulder  ankle  head  and neck. meanwhile  in the us  cheerleading accounted for 65.1% of all major physical injuries to high school females  and to 66.7% of major injuries to college students due to physical activity from 1982 to 2007  with 22 900 minors being admitted to hospital with cheerleading-related injuries in 2002.in october 2009  the american association of cheerleading coaches and advisors (aacca)  a subsidiary of varsity brands  released a study that analyzed the data from emergency room visits of all high school athletes. the study asserted that contrary to many perceptions  cheerleading injuries are in line with female sports.cheerleading (for both girls and boys) was one of the sports studied in the pediatric injury prevention  education and research program of the colorado school of public health in 2009/10–2012/13. data on cheerleading injuries is included in the report for 2012–13.   == in popular culture == movies and television the revamped and provocative dallas cowboys cheerleaders of the 1970s—and the many imitators that followed—firmly established the cheerleader as an american icon of wholesome sex appeal. in response  a new subgenre of exploitation films suddenly sprang up with titles such as the cheerleaders (1972)  the swinging cheerleaders (1974)  revenge of the cheerleaders (1975)  the pom pom girls (1976)  satan s cheerleaders (1977)  cheerleaders beach party (1978)  cheerleaders s wild weekend (1979)  and gimme an  f  (1984). in addition to r-rated sex comedies and horror films  cheerleaders became a staple of the adult film industry  starting with debbie does dallas (1978) and its four sequels. on television  the made-for-tv movie the dallas cowboys cheerleaders (which aired january 14  1979) starring jane seymour was
a highly rated success  spawning the 1980 sequel the dallas cowboys cheerleaders ii. the dallas squad was in high demand during the late 1970s with frequent appearances on network specials  awards shows  variety programs  commercials  the game show family feud and tv series such as the love boat. the sci-fi sitcom mork & mindy also based a 1979 episode around the denver broncos cheerleaders with mork (robin williams) trying out for the squad. the positively true adventures of the alleged texas cheerleader-murdering mom (1993) is a tv movie which dramatized the true story of wanda holloway  the texas mother whose obsession with her daughter s cheerleading career made headline news. another lurid tv movie based on a true story  fab five  the texas cheerleader scandal was produced in 2008. in 1999 s american beauty  lester burnham s suburban midlife crisis begins when he becomes infatuated with his daughter jane s vain cheerleader friend  angela hayes  after seeing her perform a half-time dance routine at a high school basketball game. cheerleading s increasing popularity in recent decades has made it a prominent feature in high-school themed movies and television shows. the 2000 film bring it on  about a san diego high school cheerleading squad called  the toros  starred real-life former cheerleader kirsten dunst.  bring it on was a surprise hit and earned nearly $70 million domestically. it spawned five direct-to-video sequels  bring it on again (2004)  bring it on  all or nothing (2006)  bring it on  in it to win it (2007)  bring it on  fight to the finish (2009) and bring it on  worldwide cheersmack (2017). the first bring it on was followed by the cheerleader caper-comedy  sugar & spice (2001) and a string of campy horror/action films such as cheerleader ninjas (2002)  cheerleader autopsy  cheerleader massacre (both 2003)  chainsaw cheerleaders  and ninja cheerleaders (both 2008). in 2006  hayden panettiere  star of bring it on  all or nothing  took another cheerleading role as claire bennet  the cheerleader with an accelerated healing factor on nbc s hit sci-fi tv series heroes  launching cheerleading back into the limelight of pop culture. claire was the main focus of the show s first story arc  featuring the popular catchphrase   save the cheerleader  save the world . her prominent  protagonist role in heroes was supported by a strong fan-base and provided a positive image for high school cheerleading. in 2009  panettiere starred again as a cheerleader  this time as beth cooper in the film adaptation of the novel i love you  beth cooper. in 2006  the reality show cheerleader nation was featured on the lifetime television channel. cheerleader nation is a 60-minute television series based on the paul laurence dunbar high school cheerleading team s ups and downs on the way to nationals  of which they are the three-time champions. the show also
believes that cheerleading is tough. the show takes place in lexington  kentucky. the 2007 series dallas cowboys cheerleaders  making the team shows the process of getting on the pro squad of the dallas cowboys cheerleaders. everything from initial tryouts to workout routines and the difficulties involved is shown. fired up  a teen comedy about cheerleading camp  was released by screen gems in 2009. in the supernatural horror-comedy jennifer s body (2009)  megan fox plays a demonically possessed high school cheerleader. also that year  universal pictures signed music video and film director bille woodruff (barbershop  honey) to direct the fifth film in the bring it on series titled bring it on  fight to the finish. the film stars christina milian (who previously played cheerleaders in love don t cost a thing and man of the house) and rachelle brook smith  and was released directly to dvd and blu-ray on september 1  2009. the television series glee (2009-2015) featured dianna agron as quinn fabray  the captain of her high school cheerleading squad  the cheerios. quinn becomes pregnant  leading to her expulsion from the squad  but two of the other cheerios  santana lopez and brittany pierce also feature heavily in the show. in the episode  the power of madonna  kurt hummel joins the cheerios along with mercedes jones. the cw television network created the short-lived hellcats series (2010–11). this drama was about the ups and downs of being a college cheerleader. it starred aly michalka as marty (a former gymnast forced to become a cheerleader after her academic scholarship is canceled) and ashley tisdale from high school musical. more recent films include the teen sex-comedy #1 cheerleader camp (2010) and the horror-comedy all cheerleaders die (2013)  a remake of an earlier 2001 film of the same name.  video gamesnintendo has released a pair of video games in japan for the nintendo ds  osu  tatakae  ouendan and its sequel moero  nekketsu rhythm damashii that star teams of male cheer squads  or ouendan that practice a form of cheerleading. each of the games  most difficult modes replaces the male characters with female cheer squads that dress in western cheerleading uniforms. the games task the cheer squads with assisting people in desperate need of help by cheering them on and giving them the motivation to succeed. there are also a all star cheerleader and we cheer for the wii in which one does routines at competitions with the wiimote & nunchuck. all star cheerleader is also available for nintendo ds.   == cheerleading in canada ==  cheerleading in canada is rising in popularity among the youth in co-curricular programs. cheerleading has grown from the sidelines to a competitive activity throughout the world and in particular canada. cheerleading has a few streams in canadian sports culture. it is available at the middle-school  high-school  collegiate  and best known for all-star. there are multiple regional  provincial  and national championship
opportunities for all athletes participating in cheerleading. canada does not have provincial teams  just a national program referred to as ccu or team canada. their first year as a national team was in 2009 when they represented canada at the international cheer union world cheerleading championships international cheer union (icu).   === canada as a competition === there is no official governing body for canadian cheerleading. the rules and guidelines for cheerleading used in canada are the ones set out by the usasf. however  there are many organizations in canada that put on competitions and have separate and individual rules and scoresheets for each competition. cheer evolution is the largest cheerleading and dance organization for canada. they hold many competitions as well as provide a competition for bids to worlds. there are other organizations such as the ontario cheerleading federation (ontario)  power cheerleading association (ontario)  kicks athletics (quebec)  and the international cheer alliance (vancouver). there are over forty recognized competitive gym clubs with numerous teams that compete at competitions across canada.   === canada at the world championships of cheerleading (usasf/icu) === there are two world championship competitions that canada participates in. there is the icu world championships where the national teams compete against each other and then there are the club team world championships. these club teams are referred to as  all-star  teams who compete at the usasf world championships of cheerleading. this is where teams must have earned a bid from their own country to attend. national team members who compete at the icu worlds can also compete with their  all-star club  teams. although athletes can compete in both international cheer union (icu) and usasf  crossovers between teams at each individual competition are not permitted. teams compete against the other teams from their countries on the first day of competition and the top three teams from each country in each division continue to finals. at the end of finals  the top team scoring the highest for their country earns the  nations cup . canada has multiple teams across their country that compete in the usasf cheerleading worlds championship.the international cheer union (icu) is built of 103 countries that compete against each other in four divisions  coed premier  all-girl premier  coed elite  and all-girl elite. canada has a national team ran by the canadian cheer union (ccu). their coed elite level 5 team and their all-girl elite level 5 team are 4-time world champions. they are found from all over the country. in 2013  they added two more teams to their roster. a new division that will compete head-to-head with the united states  in both the all-girl and coed premier level 6 divisions. members tryout and are selected on the basis of their skills and potential to succeed. athletes are selected from all over. canada s national program has grown to be one of the most successful programs.   == cheerleading in the united kingdom ==   == cheerleading
in australia ==   == notable former cheerleaders ==   == see also ==   == references ==   == external links == cheerleading at curlie
a student is primarily a person enrolled in a school or other educational institution who attends classes in a course to attain the appropriate level of mastery of a subject under the guidance of an instructor and who devotes time outside class to do whatever activities the instructor assigns that are necessary either for class preparation or to submit evidence of progress towards that mastery.  in the broader sense  a student is anyone who applies themselves to the intensive intellectual engagement with some matter necessary to master it as part of some practical affair in which such mastery is basic or decisive. in the united kingdom and india  the term  student  denotes those enrolled in secondary schools and higher (e.g.  college or university)  those enrolled in primary/elementary schools are called  pupils.      == africa ==   === nigeria === in nigeria  education is classified into four system known as a 6-3-3-4 system of education. it implies six years in primary school  three years in junior secondary  three years in senior secondary and four years in the university. however  the number of years to be spent in university is mostly determined by the course of study. some courses have longer study length than others. those in primary school are often referred to as pupils. those in university  as well as those in secondary school  are being referred to as students.the nigerian system of education also has other recognized categories like the polytechnics and colleges of education. the polytechnic gives out national diploma and higher national diploma certifications after a period of two years and/or four years of study respectively. higher national diploma (also known as hnd) can be obtained in a different institution from where the national diploma (also known as nd or ond) was obtained. however  the hnd cannot be obtained without the ond certificate. on the other hand  colleges of education give out nce (nigerian certificate in education) after a two-year period of study.   === south africa === in south africa  education is divided into four bands  foundation phase (grades 1–3)  intermediate phase (grades 4–6)  senior phase (grades 7–9)  and the further education and training or fet phase (grades 10–12). however  because this division is newer than most schools in the country  in practice  learners progress through three different types of school  primary school (grades 1–3)  junior school (grades 4–7)  and high school (grades 8–12). after the fet phase  learners who pursue further studies typically take three or four years to obtain an undergraduate degree or one or two years to achieve a vocational diploma or certificate. the number of years spent in university varies as different courses of study take different numbers of years. those in the last year of high school (grade 12) are referred to as  matrics  or are in  matric  and take the grade 12 examinations accredited by
the umalusi council (the south african board of education) in october and november of their matric year. exam papers are set and administered nationally through the national department of basic education for government schools  while many (but not all) private school matrics sit for exams set by the independent education board (ieb)  which operates with semi-autonomy under the requirements of umalusi. (the assessment and learning requirements of both ieb and national exams are of roughly the same standard. the perceived better performance of learners within the ieb exams is largely attributable to their attending private  better-resourced schools with the much lower teacher  learner ratios and class sizes rather than because of fundamental differences in assessment or learning content). a school year for the majority of schools in south africa runs from january to december  with holidays dividing the year into terms. most public or government schools are 4-term schools and most private schools are 3-term school  but the 3-term government or public schools and 4-term private schools are not rare.   == asia ==   === singapore === six years of primary school education in singapore is compulsory. primary school (primary 1 to 6)primary 1 to 3 (aged 7–9 respectively  lower primary) primary 4 to 6 (aged 10–12 respectively  upper primary)  secondary school ( secondary 1 to 4 or 5)sec 1s are 13  and sec 4s are 16.  express students take secondary school from sec 1 to 4   and normal acad and technical will take secondary school from sec 1 to 5.  junior college (junior college 1 to 2 - optional) or polytechnic (3 years - optional)there are also schools which have the integrated program  such as river valley high school (singapore)  which means they stay in the same school from secondary 1 to junior college 2  without having to take the  o  level examinations which most students take at the end of secondary school. international schools are subject to overseas curriculums  such as the british  american  canadian or australian boards.   === bangladesh === primary education is compulsory in bangladesh. it is a near crime to not to send children to primary school when they are of age. but it is not a punishable crime (sending children to work instead of school is a crime). because of the socio-economic state of bangladesh  child labour is sometimes legal. but the guardian must ensure the primary education. everyone who is learning in any institute or even online may be called a student in bangladesh. sometimes students taking undergraduate education are called undergraduates and students taking post-graduate education may be called post-graduates. education system of bangladesh    === brunei === education is free in brunei. darussalam not limited to government educational institutions but also private educational institutions. there are mainly two types of educational institutions  government or public  and private institutions.  several stages have to be undergone by the prospective students leading to
higher qualifications  such as bachelor s degree.  primary school (year 1 to 6) secondary school (year 7 to 11) high school [or also known as the sixth form centers] (year 12 to 13) colleges (pre-university to diploma) university level (undergraduate  postgraduate and professional)it takes six and five years to complete the primary and secondary levels respectively. upon completing these two crucial stages  students/pupils have freedom to progress to sixth-form centers  colleges or probably straight to employment.  students are permitted to progress towards university level programs in both government and private university colleges.   === cambodia === education in cambodia is free for all the students who study in primary school  secondary school or high school.  primary school (grade 1 to 6) secondary school (grade 7 to 9) high school (grade 10 to 12) college (year 1 to 3) university (year 1 to 4 or 5)after basic education  students can opt to take a bachelor s (undergraduate) degree at a higher education institution (i.e. a college or university)  which normally lasts for four years though the length of some courses may be longer or shorter depending on the institution.   === india ===  in india school is categorized in these stages  pre-primary (nursery  lower kindergarten or lkg  upper kindergarten or ukg)  primary (class 1-5)  secondary (6-10) and higher secondary (11-12). for undergraduate it is 3 years except engineering (btech or be) which is of 4 years degree course  architecture (b.arch) which is 5 years degree course and medical (mbbs) which is of 4.5 years degree course and 1 year internship  so 5.5 years.   === nepal === in nepal 12-year school is categorized in three stages  primary school  secondary school and higher secondary school. for college it averages four years for a bachelor s degree (except bvsc and ah which is five years programme and mbbs which is a five and half years programme) and two years master s degree.   === pakistan === in pakistan  12-year school is categorized in three stages  primary school  secondary school and higher secondary school. it takes five years for a student to graduate from primary school  five years for secondary school and five years for higher secondary school (also called college). most bachelor s degrees span over four years  followed by a two years master s degree.   === philippines === the philippines is currently in the midst of a transition to a k-12 (also called k+12) basic education system.  education ideally begins with one year of kinder.  once the transition is complete  elementary or grade school comprises grades 1 to 6.  although the term student may refer to learners of any age or level  the term  pupil  is used by the department of education to refer to learners in the elementary level  particularly in public schools.  secondary level or high school comprises two major divisions 
grades 7 to 10 will be collectively referred to as  junior high school  whereas grades 11 to 12 will be collectively referred to as  senior high school .  the department of education refers to learners in grade 7 and above as students. after basic education  students can opt to take a bachelor s (undergraduate) degree at a higher education institution (i.e. a college or university)  which normally lasts for four years though the length of some courses may be longer or shorter depending on the institution.   === iran === in iran 12-year school is categorized in two stages  elementary school and high school. it takes six years for a student to graduate from elementary school and six years for high school. high school study is divided into two part  junior and senior high school. in senior high school  student can choose between the following six fields  mathematics and physics  science  humanities  islamic science  vocational  or work and knowledge. after graduating from high school  students acquire a diploma. having a diploma  a student can participate in the iranian university entrance exam or konkoor in different fields of mathematics  science  humanities  languages  and art. the university entrance exam is conducted every year by national organization of education assessment  an organization under the supervision of the ministry of science  research and technology which is in charge of universities in iran. members of the bahá í religion  a much-persecuted minority  are officially forbidden to attend university  in order to prevent members of the faith becoming doctors  lawyers or other professionals  however  muslim  christian  jewish  and zoroastrian people are allowed entry to universities.   == oceania ==   === australia ===  in australia  pre-school is optional for three and four year olds.  at age five  children begin compulsory education at primary school  known as kindergarten in new south wales  preparatory school (prep) in victoria  and reception in south australia  students then continue to year one through six (ages 6 to 12).  before 2014  primary school continued on to year seven in western australia  south australia and queensland.  however  the state governments agreed that by 2014  all primary schooling will complete at year six.  students attend high school in year seven through twelve (ages 13 – 18).  after year twelve  students may attend tertiary education at university or vocational training at tafe (technical and further education).   === new zealand === in new zealand  after kindergarten or pre-school  which is attended from ages three to five  children begin primary school   year one  at five years of age. years one to six are primary school  where children commonly attend local schools in the area for that specific year group. then year seven and year eight are intermediate 
and from year nine until year thirteen  a student would attend a secondary school or a college.   == europe == europe uses the traditional  first form  second form  third form  fourth form  fifth form and six form grade system which is up to age eleven.   === finland ===  in finland a student is called  opiskelija  (plural being  opiskelijat )  though children in compulsory education are called  oppilas  (plural being  oppilaat ). first level of education is  esikoulu  (literally  preschool )  which used to be optional  but has been compulsory since the beginning of year 2015. children attend esikoulu the year they turn six  and next year they start attending  peruskoulu  (literally  basic school  corresponds to american elementary school  middle school and junior high)  which is compulsory. peruskoulu is divided to  alakoulu  (years 1 through 6) and  yläkoulu  (years 7 through 9). after compulsory education most children attend second level education (toisen asteen koulutus)  either lukio (corresponds to high school) or ammattikoulu (vocational school)  at which point they are called students (opiskelija). some attend  kymppiluokka  which is a retake on some yläkoulu s education.to attend ammattikorkeakoulu (university of applied sciences) or a university a student must have a second level education. the recommended graduation time is five years. first year students are called  fuksi  and students that have studied more than five years are called  n nnen vuoden opiskelija  (nth year student).   === france === the generic term  étudiant  (lit. student) applies only to someone attending a university or a school of a similar level  that is to say pupils in a cursus reserved to people already owning a baccalauréat.  the general term for a person going to primary or secondary school is élève. in some french higher education establishments  a bleu or  bizuth  is a first-year student. second-year students are sometimes called  carrés  (squares). some other terms may apply in specific schools  some depending on the classe préparatoire aux grandes écoles attended.   === germany ===  in germany  the german cognate term student (male) or  studentin  (female) is reserved for those attending a university. university students in their first year are called erstsemester or colloquially ersties ( firsties ). different terms for school students exist  depending on which kind of school is attended by the student. the general term for a person going to school is schüler or schülerin. they begin their first four (in some federal estates six) years in primary school or grundschule. they then graduate to a secondary school called gymnasium  which is a university preparatory school. students attending this school are called gymnasiasten  while those attending other schools are called hauptschüler or realschüler. students who graduate with the abitur are called abiturienten. the abbreviation stud. +
the abbreviation of the faculty p. e. phil. for philosophiae is a post-nominal for all students of a baccalaureus course. the abbreviation cand. for candidatus + the abbreviation of the faculty is given as a post-nominal to those close to the final exams. first name surname  stud. phil. or first name surname  cand. jur.   === ireland === in ireland  pupils officially start with primary school which consists of eight years  junior infants  senior infants  first class to sixth class (ages 5–11). after primary school  pupils proceed to the secondary school level. here they first enter the junior cycle  which consists of first year to third year (ages 11–14). at the end of third year  all students must sit a compulsory state examination called the junior certificate. after third year  pupils have the option of taking a  transition year  or fourth year (usually at age 15-16). in transition year pupils take a break from regular studies to pursue other activities that help to promote their personal  social  vocational and educational development  and to prepares them for their role as autonomous  participative and responsible members of society. it also provides a bridge to enable pupils to make the transition from the more dependent type of learning associated with the junior cert. to the more independent learning environment associated with the senior cycle.after the junior cycle pupils advance to the senior cycle  which consists of fifth year and sixth year (usually ages between 16 and 18). at the end of the sixth year a final state examination is required to be sat by all pupils  known as the leaving certificate. the leaving cert. is the basis for all irish pupils who wish to do so to advance to higher education via a points system. a maximum of 625 points can be achieved. all higher education courses have a minimum of points needed for admission.at trinity college  dublin under-graduate students are formally called  junior freshmen   senior freshmen   junior sophister  or  senior sophister  according to the year they have reached in the typical four year degree course. sophister is another term for a sophomore  though the term is rarely used in other institutions and is largely limited to trinity college dublin. at university  the term  fresher  is used to describe new students who are just beginning their first year. the term   first year  is the more commonly used and connotation-free term for students in their first year. the week at the start of a new year is called  freshers  week  or  welcome week  with a programme of special events to welcome new students. an undergraduate in the last year of study before graduation is generally known as a  finalist.    === italy ===  in italian  a matricola is a first-year student. some other terms may apply in specific schools  some
depending on the liceo classico or liceo scientifico attended. according to the goliardic initiation traditions the grades granted (following approximately the year of enrollment at university) are  matricola (freshman)  fagiolo (sophomore)  colonna (junior)  and anziano (senior)  but most of the distinctions are rarely used outside goliardia.   === sweden === in sweden  only those studying at university level are called students (student  plural studenter). to graduate from upper secondary school (gymnasium) is called ta studenten (literally  to take the student )  but after the graduation festivities  the graduate is no longer a student unless he or she enrolls at university-level education. at lower levels  the word elev (plural elever) is used. as a general term for all stages of education  the word studerande (plural also studerande) is used  meaning  studying [person] .   === united kingdom === traditionally  the term  student  is reserved for people studying at university level in the united kingdom. at universities in the uk  the term  fresher  is used informally to describe new students who are just beginning their first year. although it is not unusual to call someone a fresher after their first few weeks at university  they are typically referred to as  first years  or  first year students . the ancient scottish university of st andrews uses the terms  bejant  for a first year (from the french  bec-jaune  –  yellow beak   fledgling ). second years are called  semi-bejants  third years are known as  tertians  and fourth years  or others in their final year of study  are called  magistrands . in england and wales  primary school begins with an optional  nursery  year (either in a primary school or a privately run nursery ) followed by reception and then move on to  year one  year two  and so on until  year six  (all in primary school.) in state schools  children join secondary school when they are 11–12 years old in what used to be called  first form  and is now known as  year 7 . they go up to year 11 (formerly  fifth form ) and then join the sixth form  either at the same school or at a separate sixth form college. a pupil entering a private  fee-paying school (usually at age 13) would join the  third form  — equivalent to year 9. many schools have an alternate name for first years  some with a derogatory basis  but in others acting merely as a description — for example  shells  (non-derogatory) or  grubs  (derogatory). in northern ireland and scotland  it is very similar but with some differences. pupils start off in nursery or reception aged 3 to 4  and then start primary school in  p1  (p standing for primary) or year
1. they then continue primary school until  p7  or year 7. after that they start secondary school at 11 years old  this is called  1st year  or year 8 in northern ireland  or  s1  in scotland. they continue secondary school until the age of 16 at  5th year  year 12 or  s5  and then it is the choice of the individual pupil to decide to continue in school and (in northern ireland) do as levels (known as  lower sixth ) and then the next year to do a levels (known as  upper sixth ). in scotland  students aged 16–18 take highers  followed by advanced highers. alternatively  pupils can leave and go into full-time employment or to start in a technical college. large increases in the size of student populations in the uk and the effect this has had on some university towns or on areas of cities located near universities have become a concern in the uk since 2000. a report by universities uk   studentification  a guide to opportunities  challenges and practice  (2006) has explored the subject and made various recommendations. a particular problem in many locations is seen as the impact of students on the availability  quality and price of rented and owner-occupied property.   == americas ==   === canada ===  education in canada is within the constitutional jurisdiction of the provinces  and the overall curriculum is overseen by the provincial governments. as there is no overall national coordinating authority  the way the educational stages are grouped and named differs from region to region. education is generally divided into primary education  followed by secondary education  and post-secondary education. primary and secondary education are generally divided into numbered grades from 1 to 12  although the first grade may be preceded by kindergarten (optional in many provinces). ontario and quebec offer a pre-kindergarten  called a  junior kindergarten  in ontario  and a  garderie  in quebec. education in ontario once involved an ontario academic credit (oac) as university preparation  but that was phased out in 2007  and now all provinces except quebec have 12 grades. the oac was informally known as  grade 13  and the name was also used to refer to the students who took it. education in quebec differs from the other provinces in that it has an école primaire (literally  primary school ) consisting of grades 1-6  and an école secondaire (literally  secondary school ) consisting of secondaries i-v. secondaries i-v are equivalent to grades 7-11. a student graduating from high school (grade 11) can then either complete a three-year college program or attend a two-year pre-university program required before attending university. in some english high schools  as well as in most french schools  high school students will refer to secondary 1-5 as year one through five. so if someone in secondary three is asked
 what grade/year are you in  they will reply  three  or  sec 3 . it is presumed that the person asking the question knows that they are not referring to  grade 3  but rather  secondary 3 . this can be confusing for those outside of quebec. in some provinces  grades 1 through 6 are called  elementary school  grades 6 to 8 are called  middle school  or  junior high school  and grades 9 to 12 are considered high school. other provinces  such as british columbia  mainly divide schooling into elementary school (kindergarten to grade 7) and secondary school (grades 8 through 12). in alberta and nova scotia  elementary consists of kindergarten through grade 6. junior high consists of grades 7-9. high school consists of grades 10-12. in english provinces  the high school (known as academy or secondary school) years can be referred to simply as first  second  third and fourth year. some areas call it by grade such as grade 10  grade 11 and grade 12. the difference between college and university is significantly different from in the united states or even the united kingdom. a canadian college is more similar to an american community college but also the british  french and other european and british commonwealth such as australian and new zealand etc.  on the other hand. in contrast  a canadian university is also quite comparable to an american university as well as many other universities among the english-speaking world and francosphere. in canada  colleges are generally geared for individuals seeking applied careers  while universities are geared for individuals seeking more academic careers. university students are generally classified as first  second  third or fourth-year students  and the american system of classifying them as  freshmen   sophomores   juniors  and  seniors  is seldom used or even understood in canada. in some occasions  they can be called  senior ones   twos   threes  and  fours .   === united states === in the united states  the first official year of schooling is called kindergarten  which is why the students are called kindergarteners. kindergarten is optional in most states  but few students skip this level. pre-kindergarten  also known as  preschool  (and sometimes shortened to  pre-k ) is becoming a standard of education as academic expectations for the youngest students continue to rise. many public schools offer pre-kindergarten programs.  in the united states there are 12 years of mandatory schooling. the first eight are solely referred to by numbers (e.g. 1st grade  5th grade) so students may be referred to as 1st graders  5th graders  then once in middle school before high school you are ratio referred to as 6th  7th  8th graders. upon entering high school  grades 9 through 12 (high school) also have alternate names for students 
namely freshman  sophomore  junior and senior. the actual divisions of which grade levels belong to which division (whether elementary  middle  junior high or high school) is a matter decided by state or local jurisdictions. accordingly  college students are often called freshmen  sophomores  juniors and seniors (respectively)  unless their undergraduate program calls for more than the traditional 4 years.   ==== first year ==== the first year of college or high school is referred to as freshman year. a freshman (slang alternatives that are usually derogatory in nature include  fish   new-g   fresher   frosh   newbie   freshie   snotter   fresh-meat   skippie  etc.) is a first-year student in college  university or high school.   ==== second year ==== in the u.s.  a sophomore  also called a  soph  is a second-year student. outside the united states  the term sophomore is rarely used  with second-year students simply called  second years . folk etymology indicates that the word means  wise fool  consequently  sophomoric  means  pretentious  bombastic  inflated in style or manner  immature  crude  superficial  (according to the oxford english dictionary). it is widely assumed to be formed from greek  sophos  meaning  wise  and  moros  meaning  foolish  although the etymology suggests an origin from the now-defunct  sophumer  an obsolete variant of  sophism .   ==== post-second year ====  in the u.s.  a junior is a student in the penultimate (usually third) year and a senior is a student in the last (usually fourth) year of college  university  or high school.  a student who takes more than the normal number of years to graduate is sometimes referred to as a  super senior .  this term is often used in college  but can be used in high school as well. the term underclassman is used to refer collectively to freshmen and sophomores  and upperclassman to refer collectively to juniors and seniors  sometimes even sophomores. in some cases  the freshmen  sophomores  and juniors are considered underclassmen while seniors are designated as upperclassmen. the term middler is used to describe a third-year student of a school (generally college) that offers five years of study.  in this situation  the fourth and fifth years would be referred to as junior and senior years  respectively  and the first two years would be the freshman and sophomore years.   ==== graduate students ==== a graduate student is a student who continues his/her education after graduation. some examples of graduate programs are  business school  law school  medical school  and veterinary school. degrees earned in graduate programs include the master’s degree  a research doctoral degree  or a first professional degree.   ==== vocational school ==== students attending
vocational school focus on their jobs and learning how to work in specific fields of work. a vocational program typically takes much less time to complete than a four-year degree program  lasting 12–24 months. liberal arts that are required in four-year universities are less important to these students because the skills necessary for their careers take precedence in order for a timely completion of the program.   == student politics ==  students have their own current of politics and activism on and off campus. the student rights movement has centered itself on the empowerment of students similar to the labor movement.   == mature students ==  a mature  non-traditional  or adult student in tertiary education (at a university or a college) is normally classified as an (undergraduate) student who is at least 21–23 years old at the start of their course and usually having been out of the education system for at least two years. mature students can also include students who have been out of the education system for decades  or students with no secondary education. mature students also make up graduate and postgraduate populations by demographic of age.   == student pranks ==  university students have been associated with pranks and japes since the creation of universities in the middle ages.  these can often involve petty crime  such as the theft of traffic cones and other public property  or hoaxes. it is also not uncommon for students from one school to steal or deface the mascot of a rival school. in fact  pranks play such a significant part in student culture that numerous books have been published that focus on the issue.   == other terms == students who are repeating a grade level of schooling due to poor grades are sometimes referred to as having been  held back  or  kept back . in singapore they are described as  retained . in the philippines they are called  repeater . the term  pupil  (originally a latin term for a minor as the ward of an adult guardian  etc.) is used in some commonwealth primary and secondary schools (particularly in england and wales) instead of  student  but once attending further education (at a sixth-form college) or higher education (at university for example)  the term  student  is standard.  the term pupil is also used in the philippines by the department of education to refer to learners currently in elementary school  the term student is used for by the department of education for learners in high school. the united states military academies officially use only numerical terms  but there are colloquial expressions used in everyday speech. in order from first year to fourth year  students are referred to as  fourth-class   third-class   second-class  and  first-class  cadets or midshipmen. unofficially  other terms are used  for example at the united states military academy  freshmen
are called  plebes  sophomores are called  yearlings  or  yuks  juniors are called  cows  and seniors are called  firsties .  some universities also use numerical terms to identify classes  students enter as  first-years  and graduate as  fourth-years  (or  in some cases   fifth-years   sixth-years  etc.).   == idiomatic use ==  freshman  and  sophomore  are sometimes used figuratively  almost exclusively in the united states  to refer to a first or second effort ( the singer s sophomore album )  or to a politician s first or second term in office ( freshman senator ) or an athlete s first or second year on a professional sports team.  junior  and  senior  are not used in this figurative way to refer to third and fourth years or efforts  because of those words  broader meanings of  younger  and  older.  a junior senator is therefore not one who is in a third term of office  but merely one who has not been in the senate as long as the other senator from their state. confusingly  this means that it is possible to be both a  freshman senator  and a  senior senator  simultaneously  for example  if a senator wins election in 2008  and then the other senator from the same state steps down and a new senator elected in 2010  the former senator is both senior senator (as in the senate for two years more) and a freshman senator (since still in the first term).   == international students  day == international students  day (17 november) remembers the anniversary of the 1939 nazi storming of the university of prague after student demonstrations against the german occupation of czechoslovakia. germans closed all czech universities and colleges  sent over 1200 students to nazi concentration camps  and had nine student leaders executed (on november 17).   == see also ==  dormitory freshman 15 international student learning school bullying bullying in academia bullying in teaching school uniform student activism student club student orientation student resources school counselor student financial aid in the united states study skills tutor studentification teacher university student retention youth   == references ==
the pupil is a black hole located in the center of the iris of the eye that allows light to strike the retina. it appears black because light rays entering the pupil are either absorbed by the tissues inside the eye directly  or absorbed after diffuse reflections within the eye that mostly miss exiting the narrow pupil. the term “pupil” was created by gerard of cremona.in humans  the pupil is round  but other species  such as some cats  have vertical slit pupils  goats have horizontally oriented pupils  and some catfish have annular types. in optical terms  the anatomical pupil is the eye s aperture and the iris is the aperture stop. the image of the pupil as seen from outside the eye is the entrance pupil  which does not exactly correspond to the location and size of the physical pupil because it is magnified by the cornea.  on the inner edge lies a prominent structure  the collarette  marking the junction of the embryonic pupillary membrane covering the embryonic pupil.   == structure == the pupil is a hole located in the centre of the iris of the eye that allows light to strike the retina. it appears black because light rays entering the pupil are either absorbed by the tissues inside the eye directly  or absorbed after diffuse reflections within the eye that mostly miss exiting the narrow pupil.   == function ==  the iris is a contractile structure  consisting mainly of smooth muscle  surrounding the pupil. light enters the eye through the pupil  and the iris regulates the amount of light by controlling the size of the pupil. this is known as the pupillary light reflex. the iris contains two groups of smooth muscles  a circular group called the sphincter pupillae  and a radial group called the dilator pupillae. when the sphincter pupillae contract  the iris decreases or constricts the size of the pupil. the dilator pupillae  innervated by sympathetic nerves from the superior cervical ganglion  cause the pupil to dilate when they contract. these muscles are sometimes referred to as intrinsic eye muscles. the sensory pathway (rod or cone  bipolar  ganglion) is linked with its counterpart in the other eye by a partial crossover of each eye s fibers.  this causes the effect in one eye to carry over to the other.   === effect of light === the pupil gets wider in the dark and narrower in light.  when narrow  the diameter is 2 to 4 millimeters.  in the dark it will be the same at first  but will approach the maximum distance for a wide pupil 3 to 8 mm. however  in any human age group there is considerable variation in maximal pupil size. for example  at the peak age of 15  the dark-adapted pupil can vary from 4 mm to 9 mm with different individuals. after 25 years of age  the
average pupil size decreases  though not at a steady rate.  at this stage the pupils do not remain completely still  therefore may lead to oscillation  which may intensify and become known as hippus.  the constriction of the pupil and near vision are closely tied.  in bright light  the pupils constrict to prevent aberrations of light rays and thus attain their expected acuity  in the dark  this is not necessary  so it is chiefly concerned with admitting sufficient light into the eye.when bright light is shone on the eye  light-sensitive cells in the retina  including rod and cone photoreceptors and melanopsin ganglion cells  will send signals to the oculomotor nerve  specifically the parasympathetic part coming from the edinger-westphal nucleus  which terminates on the circular iris sphincter muscle. when this muscle contracts  it reduces the size of the pupil.  this is the pupillary light reflex  which is an important test of brainstem function. furthermore  the pupil will dilate if a person sees an object of interest.   == clinical significance ==   === effect of drugs ===  if the drug pilocarpine is administered  the pupils will constrict and accommodation is increased due to the parasympathetic action on the circular muscle fibers  conversely  atropine will cause paralysis of accommodation (cycloplegia) and dilation of the pupil. certain drugs cause constriction of the pupils  such as opioids. other drugs  such as atropine  lsd  mdma  mescaline  psilocybin mushrooms  cocaine and amphetamines may cause pupil dilation.the sphincter muscle has a parasympathetic innervation  and the dilator has a sympathetic innervation.  in pupillary constriction induced by pilocarpine  not only is the sphincter nerve supply activated but that of the dilator is inhibited.  the reverse is true  so control of pupil size is controlled by differences in contraction intensity of each muscle. another term for the constriction of the pupil is miosis.  substances that cause miosis are described as miotic.  dilation of the pupil is mydriasis.  dilation can be caused by mydriatic substances such as an eye drop solution containing tropicamide.   === diseases === a condition called bene dilitatism occurs when the optic nerves are partially damaged.  this condition is typified by chronically widened pupils due to the decreased ability of the optic nerves to respond to light.  in normal lighting  people afflicted with this condition normally have dilated pupils  and bright lighting can cause pain.  at the other end of the spectrum  people with this condition have trouble seeing in darkness.  it is necessary for these people to be especially careful when driving at night due to their inability to see objects in their full perspective.  this condition is not otherwise dangerous.   === size ===  the size of the pupil (often measured as diameter) can be a symptom of an underlying disease. dilation of the pupil is known
as mydriasis and contraction as miosis. not all variations in size are indicative of disease however. in addition to dilation and contraction caused by light and darkness  it has been shown that solving simple multiplication problems affects the size of the pupil. the simple act of recollection can dilate the size of the pupil  however when the brain is required to process at a rate above its maximum capacity  the pupils contract. there is also evidence that pupil size is related to the extent of positive or negative emotional arousal experienced by a person.   == other animals ==  not all animals have circular pupils. some have slits or ovals which may be oriented vertically  as in crocodiles  vipers  cats and foxes  or horizontally as in some rays  flying frogs  mongooses and artiodactyls such as sheep  elk  red deer  reindeer and hippopotamus  as well as the domestic horse. goats  toads and octopus pupils tend to be horizontal and rectangular with rounded corners.  some skates and rays have crescent shaped pupils  gecko pupils range from circular  to a slit  to a series of pinholes  and the cuttlefish pupil is a smoothly curving w shape. although human pupils are normally circular  abnormalities like colobomas can result in unusual pupil shapes  such as teardrop  keyhole or oval pupil shapes. there may be differences in pupil shape even between closely related animals. in felids  there are differences between small- and large eyed species. the domestic cat (felis sylvestris domesticus) has vertical slit pupils  its large relative the siberian tiger (panthera tigris altaica) has circular pupils and the eurasian lynx (lynx lynx) is intermediate between those of the domestic cat and the siberian tiger. a similar difference between small and large species may be present in canines. the small european red fox (vulpes vulpes) has vertical slit pupils whereas their large relatives  the gray wolf (canis lupus lupus) and domestic dogs (canis lupus familiaris) have round pupils. one explanation for the evolution of slit pupils is that they can exclude light more effectively than a circular pupil. this would explain why slit pupils tend to be found in the eyes of animals with a crepuscular or nocturnal lifestyle that need to protect their eyes during daylight. constriction of a circular pupil (by a ring-shaped muscle) is less complete than closure of a slit pupil  which uses two additional muscles that laterally compress the pupil.  for example  the cat s slit pupil can change the light intensity on the retina 135-fold compared to 10-fold in humans.  however  this explanation does not account for circular pupils that can be closed to a very small size (e.g.  0.5 mm in the tarsier) and the rectangular pupils of many ungulates which do not close to a narrow slit in bright light.  an alternative explanation is that a partially constricted circular pupil shades the peripheral zones of the
lens which would lead to poorly focused images at relevant wavelengths. the vertical slit pupil allows for use of all wavelengths across the full diameter of the lens  even in bright light.  it has also been suggested that in ambush predators such as some snakes  vertical slit pupils may aid in camouflage  breaking up the circular outline of the eye.in a study of australian snakes  pupil shapes correlated both with diel activity times and with foraging behaviour. most snake species with vertical pupils were nocturnal and also ambush foragers  and most snakes with circular pupils were diurnal and active foragers. overall  foraging behaviour predicted pupil shape accurately in more cases than did diel time of activity  because many active-foraging snakes with circular pupils were not diurnal.  it has been suggested that there may be a similar link between foraging behaviour and pupil shape amongst the felidae and canidae discussed above.a 2015 study confirmed the hypothesis that elongated pupils have increased dynamic range  and furthered the correlations with diel activity. however it noted that other hypotheses could not explain the orientation of the pupils. they showed that vertical pupils enable ambush predators to optimise their depth perception  and horizontal pupils to optimise the field of view and image quality of horizontal contours. they further explained why elongated pupils are correlated with the animal s height.  animals with non-circular pupils                     == society and culture == in a surprising number of unrelated languages  the etymological meaning of the term for pupil is  little person . this is true  for example  of the word pupil itself  this comes into english from latin pūpilla  which means  doll  girl  and is a diminutive form of pupa   girl . (the double meaning in latin is preserved in english  where pupil means both  schoolchild  and  dark central portion of the eye within the iris .) this may be because the reflection of one s image in the pupil is a minuscule version of one s self. in the old babylonian period (c. 1800-1600 bc) in ancient mesopotamia  the expression  protective spirit of the eye  is attested  perhaps arising from the same phenomenon. the english phrase apple of my eye arises from an old english usage  in which the word apple meant not only the fruit but also the pupil or eyeball.   == see also ==  pupillary response pupil function dilated fundus examination eye contact horner s syndrome mydriasis synechia (eye) anisocoria adie s pupil argyll robertson pupil light-near dissociation marcus gunn pupil   == references ==   == external links == atlas image  eye_1 at the university of michigan health system —  sagittal section through the eyeball  atlas image  eye_2 at the university of michigan health system — 
sagittal section through the eyeball  a pupil examination simulator  demonstrating the changes in pupil reactions for various nerve lesions.
graduate refers to someone who has been the subject of a graduation  namely  someone who has completed the requirements of an academic degree.   == education == graduate  an alumnus graduate diploma  generally a postgraduate qualification  although some graduate diplomas involve the study of undergraduate level courses graduate school  a school that awards advanced degrees high school graduate  someone who has completed high school (in the u.s.) postgraduate education  a student studying in a graduate school   == arts  entertainment  and media == graduate (band)  the band that roland orzabal and curt smith were in before forming tears for fears graduate (film)  a 2011 telugu-language film  graduate  (song)  a 1997 song by third eye blind   == other uses == graduate (dinghy)  a 12.5-foot sailing dinghy graduated cylinder  a container with graduated markings used for measuring liquids   == see also == graduation (disambiguation) the graduate (disambiguation)
accra technical traning centre
a barista (  italian  [baˈrista]  from the italian for  bartender ) is a person  usually a coffeehouse employee  who prepares and serves espresso-based coffee drinks.   == etymology and inflection == the word barista comes from italian  where it means a male or female  bartender  who typically works behind a counter  serving hot drinks (such as espresso)  cold alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages  and snacks. the native plural in english is baristas  while in italian the plural is baristi for masculine (literally meaning  barmen   bartenders ) or bariste for feminine (literally meaning  barmaids ).   == application of the title ==  while the title is not regulated  most coffee shops use the title to describe the preparer of coffee and operator of an espresso machine.  baristas generally operate a commercial espresso machine  and their role is preparing and pulling the shot  the degree to which this is automated or done manually varies significantly  ranging from push-button operation to an involved manual process. espresso is a notoriously finicky beverage  and good manual espresso making is considered a skilled task. further  preparation of other beverages  particularly milk-based drinks such as cappuccinos and lattes  but also non-espresso coffee such as drip or press pot  requires additional work and skill for effective frothing  pouring and most often latte art. the barista usually has been trained to operate the machine and to prepare the coffee based on the guidelines of the roaster or shop owner  while more experienced baristas may have discretion to vary preparation or experiment. to make the coffee well  there is a series of steps needing attention  including grinding the beans  extracting the coffee  frothing the milk and pouring.beyond the preparation of espresso and other beverages and general customer service  skilled baristas acquire knowledge of the entire process of coffee to effectively prepare a desired cup of coffee  including maintenance and programming of the machine  grinding methods  roasting  and coffee plant cultivation  similar to how a sommelier is familiar with the entire process of wine making and consumption. a barista can acquire these skills by attending training classes  but they are more commonly learned on the job.   == competition == formal barista competitions originated in norway  and one such is the world barista championships  held annually at varied international locations. baristas worldwide compete  though they must first compete in a competition held in their own country to qualify to enter in the wbc. these competitions focus on promoting coffee. each barista is judged on their skill representing their country s drinks.   == national barista day == national barista day is an event celebrated annually on the 1st of march in australia. created by the almond breeze barista blend company and the community baristas for baristas  the first national barista day was inaugurated in 2019.
the day is to recognise the barista community in australia  which is one of the leading coffee scenes in the world. the event was inspired from the results of a survey which demonstrated that only 79% of baristas feel appreciated. the concept was developed so australians could show their barista love by celebrating the efforts of baristas on a nationwide basis. this is achieved by allowing the public to nominate their favourite barista for a cash prize. in 2019  the competition period in which these nominations occurred was between the 4th february 2019 and the 28th february 2019. the most successful nominee   australia s barista of choice  is given a $5 000 reward and an opportunity to share in the wisdom of a world-renowned barista. the champion is determined by an organised panel of industry leaders. a further 9 barista champions are given $1000  of which they can use to further their skills or develop their business. in addition to this  the findings of a large research survey into australia s barista culture are released on national barista day  in the form of an e-book available on the baristas for baristas website. the national barista day’s first champion was celeste norris  a barista from the good 2 go cafe in melbourne’s hosier lane.   == see also == barista bikini barista milkman soda jerk sommelier  coffee portal   == references ==
builder may refer to   construction worker  who specializes in building work carpenter  a skilled craftsman who works with wood general contractor  that specializes in building work subcontractor builder (detergent)  a component of modern detergents bob the builder  a british children s tv series real estate developer  who causes buildings to be constructed builder (hockey)  in ice hockey  manages or builds the game builder (united states navy)  u.s. navy rating builder homesite  a consortium of american home builders builder pattern  an object-oriented design pattern interactive scenario builder  an rf tactical decision aid often referred to as builder build engineer  a software engineer specializing in builds (versions) of large software products   == names == builders (film)  a 1942 british propaganda film the builder (film)  2010 film the builder  british magazine now known as building  the builder  (short story)  a 1953 short story by philip k. dick  the builders  an episode in the 1970s british television comedy fawlty towers the institute of builders  british professional society builders  international music group also known as the bilders  bilderbergers and bilderine   == see also == all pages with titles beginning with builder  all pages with titles containing builder buildering  rock-climbing on the outside of a building constructor (disambiguation) c++builder world builder (disambiguation) build (disambiguation)
a construction worker is a manual laborer employed in the physical construction of the built environment and its infrastructure.the term construction worker is a broad and generic term and most construction workers are primarily described by the level and type of work they perform. labourers carry out a wide range of practical tasks to help tradespersons on construction sites.  labourers clean the construction site on a regular basis. they use tools such as rakes  shovels  and wheelbarrows to remove rubble  scraps of metal  and wood or they might also need to sweep out certain areas  and get building supplies in order. construction workers may also colloquially be referred to as  hard hat workers  or  hard hats  as they often wear hardhats for safety.   == safety == construction safety is very important to ensure a safe environment for the workers. all construction workers need to be educated on safety at each construction site to minimize injury.   == controversy == in 2008  a human rights watch report described unsafe and unfair working conditions and failure on the part of the chinese government to enforce labor standards in the construction industry. the international labour organization (ilo) estimated that  at the end of 2006  90% of the 40 million construction workers in china were migrant workers. many of the migrant workers turned to construction work after their farming communities collapsed into poverty.in the united states  illegal immigrant labor is prevalent in the construction industry. because of the questionable legal status of these workers  employers often have the ability to commit crimes such as wage theft and violation of workplace standards without fear of facing consequences. similar abuse of immigrant labor is also a problem in qatar during the lead up to the 2022 fifa world cup where workers mostly from poor countries in the indian sub-continent are forced to work in desert conditions for as little as €6.20 a day.   == see also ==   == references ==   == external links == construction and maintenance at curlie
a nanny is a person who provides child care. typically  this care is given within the children s family setting.throughout history  nannies were usually servants in large households and reported directly to the lady of the house. today  modern nannies  like other domestic workers  may live in or out of the house  depending on their circumstances and those of their employers. there are many employment agencies that specialize in childcare. nannies in many areas are a sought after member of the workforce.  many nannies become a part of their family s household.  although previously looked at as a lesser-than job  today s demand has made it a popular and valued addition to the lives of the family s household.   nannies differ slightly from other child care providers. a childminder works out of their own home  operating as a small business. in america  childminders are often advertised as a daycare. depending on the country the childminder or daycare is in  government registration may or may not be required. within the uk  a childminder must be ofsted registered  hold a current paediatric first aid qualification  public liability insurance and follow the eyfs. a mother s helper is someone who may live in or out of the household  and assists the woman of the house with general chores as well as caring for the children. the term au pair usually refers to a young woman (or occasionally man)  who comes from abroad to live with the host family and learn the local culture and language  while helping care for the children. a governess concentrates on educating children inside their own home  and a kindergarten or schoolteacher does the same  but in a school environment.  nannies today are often used in place of daycare  because they can be more cost effective. even though there are no legal requirements to be considered a nanny  families may require a background check or a cpr certification. families may also look for other special skills in a nanny  such as being bilingual or having early childhood development coursework done. nannies help play a key role in a child s development by providing care.     == history == in the 19th and early 20th centuries  a nanny was usually known as a  nurse  and was typically female.  nurses  were found in higher income homes  and  nurses  were either hired or were slaves. originally  the hired woman would have been expected to breastfeed the infant  a role known as a  wet nurse . in some households  the nurse was a senior member of the household staff and ran her own domain  a suite of rooms called the nursery. some were supported by at least one assistant  known as a nursemaid (or nurserymaid). because of their deep involvement in raising the children of the family  nannies were often remembered
with great affection and treated more kindly than the junior servants. nannies that were slaves still suffered from racism and cruelty. nannies may have remained in the employment of the same aristocratic or gentry family for years  looking after successive generations of children.   === colonial era ===  nannies were present in the households of the administrators of european colonial empires throughout the world. it was a characteristic feature of colonial society that the children of european administrative officers were entrusted to the care of native women  or slaves. nannies in colonial times spent their lives in the homes of their masters  often from childhood till old age  taking care of more than one generation (depending on the duration of the post). it was not uncommon for these nannies to be brought along with the family away from their native country when administrative officers were posted  home  or to another colony.  in british india a nanny was known as ayah  after aia  nurse  governess (in portuguese). this term is presently part of the vocabulary of various languages of the subcontinent  meaning also female servant or maid. in chinese she was an amah. in the dutch east indies the household nanny was known as baboe.   == types of nanny ==   === live-in nanny === a  live-in  nanny is much less common than it once was. being a live-in nanny may be ideal for a woman or man looking to move interstate or abroad for either a short period of time or to set themselves up financially. typically  a live-in nanny is responsible for the entire care of the children of their employers. this includes anything from washing the children s clothes  tidying the children s rooms  supervising homework  preparing children s meals  taking children to and from school  and taking children to after-school sport and/or activities. the job may include a separate apartment (sometimes called a  nanny flat ) or room  and possibly a car. while a live-in nanny was commonly available 24 hours a day in the past  this is much less common now and often these nannies work 10-12 hours on and the remainder of the day off. essentially  these nannies are working while the children are awake and the parents are at work. a live-in nanny is nowadays more common among wealthier families  because live-in nannies often have all their living expenses paid and provided by the employer.   === nanny share === some families use what is known as a  nanny share  where two or more families pay for the same nanny to care for the children in each family on a part-time basis.   === night nanny === a more recent addition to the role of a nanny is that of a night nanny. the night nanny usually works with a family anywhere from one night to seven nights  per week. a night
nanny generally works with children from newborn to five years of age. a night nanny can provide a teaching role  helping parents to establish good sleeping patterns or troubleshooting the sleeping patterns of a child. roles and qualifications vary between countries. the night nanny works together with the family s requirements and philosophies. the qualifications of a night nanny are usually in mothercraft nursing (see sleep guidance specialist or early childhood development). pay rates vary from country to country but are usually well paid in comparison to the general nanny  as the night nanny is seen as a specialist or expert in their field.    === maternity nurse / newborn care specialists / confinement nanny ===  historically  european women were confined to their beds or their homes for extended periods of time after giving birth. care was provided either by her female relatives (mother or mother-in-law) or by a temporary attendant known as a monthly nurse. these weeks were called confinement or lying-in  and ended with the re-introduction of the mother to the community in the christian ceremony of the churching of women. a modern version of this rest period has evolved with intentions to give maximum support to the new mother  especially if she is recovering from a difficult labor and delivery. in the us these specialty maternity nannies are known as newborn care specialists (disassociating this specialty from medically qualified nursing). they are highly experienced in all aspects of newborns  aside from medical issues. they may work 24 hours a day  seven days per week  but most commonly work five nights/days a week for the first three months of a newborn s life. the role can consist of assisting parents with feeding guidance  nursery set up  premature infant  multiples  colic  reflux  and sleep guidance/training. there are various training organizations that offer non-accredited certifications  however  in an unregulated field parents should ensure that the qualifications of their maternity nanny are legitimate and accredited. the newborn care specialist association is one of many self-appointed certification entities. some doulas specialize in postpartum care for mother and baby. another related job is perinatal assistant. chinese and related east asian traditions practice a form of postpartum confinement known as zuo yue zi  sitting the month  which are traditions and customs regarding recovery from childbirth. the  confinement ladies  are referred to as yue sao  and they have specialized knowledge of how to care for both baby and mother. in singapore and malaysia  newborn care specialists are better known as confinement nannies. they assist the mother in taking care of the baby in order to let mother have a good rest. confinement food will be prepared to help with the recovery. usually  the employment period will be about 28 days up to a maximum of 16 weeks. in korea these postpartum care workers are called sanhujorisa. in the netherlands  standard postnatal care  supported by state medical insurance  includes
more than a week of all-day visits called kraamzorg. this kraamverzorgster ( maternity home care assistant ) teaches the new mother how to care for her baby  measures both of their health  prepares light meals  entertains older children  performs light household tasks  cleans the home and disinfects the bathroom. they help care for the mother  baby  and family.   == demographic == typically  women from their 20s to 60s take up employment as nannies. some are younger  though normally younger workers are nursemaids or au pairs rather than nannies in the traditional use of the term. a few positions are filled by men  the term manny is sometimes used for a male nanny  especially in the us and uk.   == associations == there are a number of national and international professional associations representing nannies and nanny agencies. the international nanny association (ina) was founded in 1985. ina is a non-profit organization which provides an educational association for nannies with placement  employment  and professional support. the alliance of professional nanny agencies (apna) was founded in 1993. it is a non-profit organization that promotes professionalism in the nanny placement industry. in june 2012 the australian nanny association (ana) was formed in australia with the aims of having professional nannies included in the regulated government subsidized childcare scheme of the country. ana is a volunteer run  not for profit association that also hopes to change some public misconceptions about nannies  encourage professionalism  and be a source of support to nannies and the families who employ them.   == training and qualifications == in the united kingdom  no formal qualifications or training are required to become a nanny. however  the national nursery examination board (nneb) was founded in 1945  as the awarding body in qualifications for childminders  and nursery personnel. in 1994 the nneb and the council for early years awards (ceya) merged to form cache – the council for awards in children s care and education  with their cache level 3 diploma in child care and education providing the knowledge and understanding of child development and education needed to work as a nanny. norland college is a private college near bath  which offers highly regarded training as a nanny. it also operates its own employment agency for graduates  as well as a local nursery in bath. in the united states  no formal qualifications are required to be a nanny . nannies in the united states can earn specialized childcare diplomas and certifications from amslee institute. amslee institute offers 5 programs that are licensed by the florida department of education  commission of independent education  5951. us nannies also have access to online cache endorsed training created by 2004 international nanny association nanny of the year and parenting author michelle larowe. this training is offered through a partnership with nannytraining.com and nanny stella  inc.  the only us based cache endorsed training centre for the early
years .   == notable nannies ==   === british royal family === charlotte bill (c. 1875–1965)  known as lalla  nanny of prince john of the united kingdom  featured in the film the lost prince clara knight  known as  alla  nanny of queen elizabeth ii and princess margaret tiggy legge-bourke mvo (born 1965)  nanny to prince william and  prince harry lillian sperling  head nanny of the show nanny 911   === other royal families === margaretta eagar (1863–1936)  nanny to the four daughters of tsar nicholas ii louise von sturmfeder (1789 - 1866)  lady-in-waiting to the house of habsburg and aja (then rendered  nurse  now nanny) to franz joseph i of austria and his brother maximilian i of mexico   === other === st. josephine bakhita (1869–1947)  an enslaved african who worked as a nanny and later became a roman catholic saint elizabeth ann everest  beloved nanny to the young winston churchill deborah carroll and stella reid  highly experienced nannies from the show nanny 911 jo frost  nanny who hosted a successful television program supernanny in the uk and us  showing parents techniques to help with unruly children yoselyn ortega  nanny accused of stabbing to death children lucia and leo krim in 2012. sandra samuel (b. 1964)  an indian nanny who saved the life of a child during the november 2008 mumbai attacks in which the baby s two parents were murdered  later honored with honorary israeli citizenship.   == fictional representations ==   === animals === nana  a newfoundland dog  in peter pan   === women === mrs. bird  nanny and housekeeper to the browns in michael bond s classic paddington bear series mrs. baylock  in the film the omen (1976) virginia  virgie  fane (portrayed by wendy craig)  the nanny in the film  the nanny (1965) phoebe figalily  in the u.s. sitcom nanny and the professor which starred juliet mills and richard long fran fine  portrayed by fran drescher in the sitcom the nanny peyton flanders / mrs. mott (portrayed by rebecca de mornay)  the nanny in the film the hand that rocks the cradle (1992) nanny  a character in kay thompson s 1950s eloise book series and its different adaptations nanny  on the television series jim henson s muppet babies nanny hawkins  from evelyn waugh s book brideshead revisited (1945) nanny hutchinson  in the novel the nanny diaries (2002) and its sequel nanny returns (2010)  by former nannies emma mclaughlin and nicola kraus nanny mcphee  the titular character in the film nanny mcphee (2005)  based on christianna brand s nurse matilda book series clara oswin oswald  a nanny in both the present and victorian era  in the british science fiction tv show doctor who mary poppins  from p. l. travers  children s book series  set in edwardian london 
played by julie andrews in its film and stage adaptations and emily blunt in the sequel kate hewitt (portrayed by vanessa marcil)  a nanny in the 2008 hallmark channel film the nanny express. jessie prescott (portrayed by debby ryan)  a nanny in the disney channel sitcom jessie amelia hernández  portrayed by adriana barraza in the 2006 film babel breda mcqueen  played by moya brady  nanny to the lomax family in uk soap opera hollyoaks mary taylor  portrayed by patti clare  nanny to the alahan family in uk soap opera coronation street   === men === andy the manny (portrayed by adam devine)  in the television series modern family sean armstrong (portrayed by hulk hogan)  an ex-wrestler in the movie mr. nanny (1993) lynn aloysius belvedere (portrayed by christopher hewett)  in the sitcom mr. belvedere charles (portrayed by scott baio)  a 19-year-old student and live-in babysitter in exchange for room and board  in the sitcom charles in charge daniel hillard / euphegenia doubtfire (portrayed by robin williams) a voice actor and father of three young children  in the movie mrs. doubtfire (1993) joseph paul  joe  longo (portrayed by joey lawrence)  a former executive and commodities trader with an mba who lost his job  money  and marriage and agrees to be the live-in nanny to assist his girlfriend  politician mel  and give advice to her niece and nephew in the television series melissa & joey the manny  in christian burch s books the manny files (2006) and hit the road  manny (2008) tony micelli (portrayed by tony danza)  a retired baseball player and single father  in the sitcom who s the boss angus partridge (portrayed by dallas roberts)  in the television series the l word lieutenant shane wolfe (portrayed by vin diesel)  a united states navy seal assigned to stay at the plummer residence  to search for a secret project hidden somewhere in the house  and meanwhile to look after the family s five children  in the film the pacifier (2005) grant gordon (portrayed by justin chatwin  secret identity of superhero  the ghost  works for reporter lucy fletcher as a nanny in the doctor who christmas special  the return of doctor mysterio.    == television == various television programs feature real nannies  many of whom help parents discipline children. these include abismo de pasión (in spanish)  nanny 911  supernanny  and take home nanny.   == see also == chaperone  one who accompanies teenagers and young adults to social events english nanny & governess school   == references ==   == external links == uk nanny uk nanny supports nannies in the uk by holding events (social  training  conferences and awards)  campaigning for nannies (go gross  practically imperfect and nanny rights) and providing a supportive online community ncma the national childminding association website scma the scottish childminding
association website nicma the northern ireland childminding association website ofsted the ofsted website usa today article on ceo nannies
babysitting is temporarily caring for a child. babysitting can be a paid job for all ages  however  it is best known as a temporary activity for young teenagers who are too young to be eligible for employment in the general economy. it provides autonomy from parental control  and spending money  as well as an introduction to the techniques of child care.  it emerged as a social role for teenagers in the 1920s  and became especially important in suburban america in the 1950s and 1960s  when there was an abundance of small children. it stimulated an outpouring of folk culture in the form of urban legends  pulp novels  and horror films.   == general == the majority of the time  babysitters tend to be in middle/junior high school  high school or college (age 13+). there are some adults who have in-home childcare as well. the type of work for babysitters also varies from watching a sleeping child  changing diapers  playing games  preparing meals  and to teaching the child to read or even drive (if the age is right). depending on the agreement between parents and babysitter.    in some countries various organizations produce courses for babysitters  many focusing on child safety and first aid appropriate for infants and children  these classes or courses can be provided at local hospitals and schools. these educational programs can equip the babysitter with information to keep both the children being cared for  and the sitter themselves  safe in various scenarios. different activities will be needed for babies and toddlers. it will be beneficial for the babysitters to understand toddler developmental milestones in order to plan for the necessary activities. as paid employees  babysitters often require a disclosure or assessment of one s criminal record in order to ward off possible hebephiles  pedophiles and other unsuitable applicants.   == etymology == the term  baby sitter  first appeared in 1937  while the verb form  baby-sit  was first recorded in 1947. the american heritage college dictionary notes  one normally would expect the agent noun babysitter with its -er suffix to come from the verb baby-sit  as diver comes from dive  but in fact babysitter is first recorded in 1937  ten years earlier than the first appearance of baby-sit. thus the verb was derived from the agent noun rather than the other way around  and represents a good example of back-formation. the use of the word  sit  to refer to a person tending to a child is recorded from 1800. the term may have originated from the action of the caretaker  sitting on  the baby in one room  while the parents were entertaining or busy in another. it s also theorized that the term may come from hens  sitting  on their eggs  thus  caring for  their chicks.   == international variations in definition == in
british english the term refers only to caring for a child for a few hours  on an informal basis and usually in the evening when the child is asleep for most of the time. in american english the term can include caring for a child for the whole or most of the day  and on a regular or more formal basis  which would be described as childminding in british english. in india and pakistan  a babysitter or nanny is known as an ayah or aya  a person hired on a longer term contract basis to look after a child regardless of the presence of the parents.   == references ==   === notes ===   === bibliography === miriam forman-brunell. babysitter  an american history. new york university press  june  2009.from english dictionary   == external links ==  the dictionary definition of babysitting at wiktionary  babysitting courses provided by the american red cross yourchild  babysitter safety university of michigan health system a guide to the business of babysitting in the united states quality child care from university of florida/ifas department of family  youth and community sciences  factors in choosing quality child care.
an au pair (  plural  au pairs) is a helper from a foreign country working for  and living as part of  a host family. typically  au pairs take on a share of the family s responsibility for childcare as well as some housework  and receive a monetary allowance for personal use. au pair arrangements are subject to government restrictions which specify an age range usually from mid-late teens to mid to late twenties  some countries explicitly limit the arrangement to females. arrangements differ between europe  where the concept originated  and north america. in europe  au pairs are only supposed to work part-time  and they often also study part-time  generally focusing on the language of the host country. in the united states  they may provide full-time childcare. in 1969  the european agreement on au pair placement was signed  and it came into force in 1971.  au pair companies in the united states have significant non-refundable fees once the au pair arrives in the country.  the contract does not guarantee childcare  despite many families  reliance on the program. unlike many other types of domestic assistants  the au pair is considered a part of the host family and not merely an employee. in some countries the au pair wears a uniform  but more commonly the au pair only follows the host family s dress code and wears attire appropriate for the work description  typically including a protective apron.   == history == the title comes from the french term au pair  meaning  at par  or  equal to  indicating that the relationship is intended to be one of equals  the au pair is intended to become a member of the family  albeit a temporary one  rather than a traditional domestic worker.  although it is not as simple to acquire au pair status as it was in 1840  the expression was used to indicate economic parity between the  employer  and their  employee . the expression au pair was used in this sense in 1840 by honoré de balzac  sylvie rogron fut envoyée à cent écus de pension en apprentissage....deux ans après  elle était au pair  si elle ne gagnait rien  ses parents ne payaient plus rien pour son logis et sa nourriture (balzac  pierrette  1840  p.17). (sylvie rogron was sent out to an apprenticeship at an annual cost of one hundred écus... after two years  she was au pair  she wasn t earning anything  but at least her parents did not have to pay for her room and board.)   == concept and conditions == the concept of the au pair originated in europe after world war ii. before the war  an abundant supply of domestic servants had been available to look after the children of middle and upper-class families  but changes in social attitudes  and increases
in wages and taxes after the war  made the old system inaccessible to most middle-class parents. at the same time  social change increased the number of middle class girls who needed to earn their own living  and rising educational aspirations for girls made experiencing foreign cultures and learning foreign languages more common aspirations. however  due to the stigma attached to being a  servant  an essentially working-class status that even working-class people were repudiating  this potential supply for domestic labour could only be utilised if a new non-servant role was created. thus the au pair was born. the au pair was supposed to be treated as a member of the family rather than a servant  and was not required to wear a uniform. an au pair receives an allowance and his/her own room. the usual practice is that au pairs eat with the family most of the time  and join in some of the usual family activities such as outings and trips. however  host families ordinarily expect to have some private time to themselves  particularly in the evenings. during this time  an au pair might retire to his or her room to watch television  study  or go out with friends. provision is often made for the au pair to have time for studying  especially the language of the host country. the council of europe recommends that au pairs be issued standard contracts with their family. some au pairs are now male  but females remain the overwhelming majority. many governments impose limits as to how many hours an au pair is allowed to work. tasks can include taking children to and from school  taking children to after-school activities  cooking  cleaning  ironing  tidying up and babysitting. each placement varies depending on the host family. in many developing countries  an abundant supply of local domestic labour is still available  so there is little or no demand for au pairs. au pair relationships between host families and au pairs can be established through various means. traditionally  au pair agencies located in a given host country have served as an intermediary between young people seeking to become au pairs and families in the country that are interested in hosting an au pair. such agencies typically charge a fee to the host family for fulfilling an intermediary role between the host family and possible au pairs. the agency conducts some process of screening and evaluation of prospective au pairs and then proposes possible au pairs to the host families  who are their principal customers. traditional agencies also assist with the arrangement of some of the bureaucratic formalities associated with an au pair visit. in recent years  the basic function of bringing aspiring au pairs and interested host families together has increasingly been provided by websites that allow families and au pairs to post online profiles and search for each other directly on the basis of the information provided in these profiles. such websites
supplement this search functionality with various information offerings about au pair requirements in different countries as well as by providing user support for their registered users. charges are made to users of such websites to allow a full exchange of the personal contact details necessary for finalizing an au pair placement. this approach typically gives prospective au pairs and host families a wider range of choices and more direct control over the selection process than is possible through a traditional agency at a considerably lower price than traditional agencies charge. at the same time  use of such websites requires an aspiring host family or au pair to invest more personal effort in the search process and to make their selection and arrange the formalities of an au pair stay without the involvement of a third party.   == duties == au pairs can be expected to do a combination of child care and light housework duties. they are not responsible for housework that does not relate to the children s or communal living areas that are kept tidy by all family members. an au pair s primary duties are taking care of the children and entertaining them  as well as teaching the native tongue if this is required. an au pair s duties may include   waking up the children taking/picking up children to/from school helping with school homework playing with the children taking the children on outings to parks  playgroups and other activities preparing light meals for children and clean up after the meals doing the children s laundry and ironing their clothes making the children s beds tidying up the children s toys cleaning the children s bathroom cleaning the children s rooman au pair does not have to   manage the whole household prepare meals for the parents make the host parents  beds and clean their bathrooms clean the floors clean the windows take care of the pets do gardening supervise/take care of other children that aren t the host kidsthe duties of the au pair also includes following the house rules set by the host family. this includes abiding the curfew  bedtime and dress code  as well as following rules for computer and phone use. these rules may be described in a household handbook  which is provided to the au pair when moving in to the host family. the curfew and bedtime is typically assigned based on when the au pair will begin work in the following morning.   == asia-pacific ==   === australia === australia has no official au pair program through the government. visas that can be used by au pairs are the working holiday and work and holiday visa  which both provide working rights. students  especially those who study english  often become demi-pairs to immerse themselves into the language and culture of australia. au pair arrangements in australia and work hours vary from 10 to 40 hours per week. the cultural au pair association of australia (capaa) was formed
in 2012 on a not-for-profit basis. capaa is an industry based association for au pair agencies  with the purpose of protecting and developing the au pair experience as a rewarding cultural exchange programme.  members agree to abide by the code of conduct developed by the international au pair association (iapa). capaa members agree to meet strict business and ethical standards to ensure competence  fair dealing and high integrity. the australian au-pair families association (aapfa) is a not-for-profit organisation and members are australian host families. aapfa supports self-regulation in the au pair industry and provides information and guidance to au-pair families based on international hosting standards and ethics.   === china === au pair agencies in china sent young chinese to western nations to work as au pairs abroad  particularly for families who had adopted babies from china  to help them learn chinese. in addition  china s rising middle class and economic growth have led to a growing demand for au pairs. this helps create opportunities to learn english at an early age  as well as the opportunity for mothers to return to work and have additional help in raising the children. however  the main goal for most families hiring au pairs is primarily to help their children as well as themselves learn english  as the mother has the biggest role in raising the children.to be an au pair in china  participants need to apply for an x or an f visa. the first one is required for internships  studies and long term courses. the f visa entitles a person to live in china to take part in a cultural exchange  study tours or language courses.   === new zealand === au pairs are required to obtain a nz working holiday visa and will need at least 200 hours childcare experience prior to making an application. au pairs are also required to undergo a police and medical background check. new zealand au pair agencies work hard to safe-guard both the au pairs and host families  well-being. most new zealand au pair agencies are members of iapa (international au pair association) and will also require au pairs to implement the early childhood education curriculum  te whariki.   === turkey === turkey is a transcontinental country that spans europe and asia  thus turkish culture is heterogeneous and diversified. as culture and aspirations of this multi-ethnic country have recently turned to europe  where the  au pair programs are especially popular  turkey may be considered as one of the most popular non-eu country among the  au pairs. nevertheless  the  au pair programs are still something brand-new and unusual in turkey  what makes it a  great opportunity for both young people  tempted by a  unique turkish culture  and for families  looking for a  reliable caregiver for their children. one of the biggest obstacles towards becoming flourishing centre of the  au pairs’ community is the visa requirement
for foreigners. entering turkey without a valid visa is impossible for au pairs – and to apply for a visa any  potential au pair needs both an au pair contract and an invitation letter  what significantly reduces the number of people willing to make an effort and go through such a  complicated application process.   == europe ==   === austria === the tradition of au pairing is well established in austria  and prospective au pairs are served by several agencies that are accustomed to dealing with direct applications from foreigners. agencies often charge their au pairs a fee equivalent to a week s pocket money and will tell the au pair where to take the documents to be stamped for a fee. officially  au pairs from outside europe must obtain both a work and residence permit (beschäftigungsbewilligung). the employing family should apply at their local employment office at least two weeks before the start date.  before the permit can be approved and an anzeigebestätigung issued  the authorities must see an agreement or contract (signed by the employer and the au pair) and proof that health and accident insurance cover has been obtained by the au pair.   === belgium === in belgium  au pairs must take part in a dutch  french  or german language course (according to the region) offered by an officially recognised institution – private tuition  distance learning courses  or private school courses are not accepted. an au pair without a basic knowledge of the host country s language will have to attend an intensive language course upon arriving in belgium. the host family will also prepare a cultural programme. nationals of all countries (except the states of the european union  iceland  monaco  norway  liechtenstein and switzerland) who want to stay more than three months in belgium are subject to the visa/work permit requirement. non-eu members who want to work as an au pair in belgium must be in possession of   a passport valid for at least one year a recent certificate of good conduct covering the last five years a medical certificate obtained from a doctor approved by the embassy an employment authorization  which must be requested by the belgium host family and issued along with the work permit b. the application must be submitted in time to allow for a possible investigation by the foreign office.providing childcare is the main responsibility of an au pair  though the host family may also request some light housework. all tasks are defined in the official au pair contract and cannot be changed by the au pair or the host family. the au pair receives free board and lodging  and is entitled to food and accommodation in cases of illness and holidays. she also has her own bedroom and key to the house. the host family subscribes to health and accident insurance  as well as an insurance for potential repatriation costs for the au pair. in
belgium  an au pair is entitled to at least 450 euros pocket money per month  deposited to her bank account. the au pair is entitled to the full amount of monthly pocket money in cases of illness and during holidays. au pairs are not allowed to work more than 4 hours a day (babysitting hours included) and 20 hours per week  spread out over a maximum of 6 days a week. au pair are entitled to at least one day off per week and at least one whole weekend a month. holiday entitlement is not regulated in belgium  but it is recommended that an au pair receives a minimum of 2 weeks  holiday.   === denmark === in denmark  an au pair must be between 18 and 30 years old  must be able to master at least one of the following languages  english  german  danish  swedish or norwegian. the daily working schedule must be at least 3 and a maximum of 5 hours  that is between 18 and 30 hours a week. the au pair must have at least one weekday free. at least one free day a month should be a sunday. the au pair is to be regarded as a family member that means being equal to the other family members and participating in the everyday life of the host family. in return for her/his work  the au pair receives board and lodging  pocket money (from 4 350 dkk 2019 level) and access to follow language courses at language schools. the au pair usually are allowed to stay with their host family maximum period of 24 months  but no longer than stated in the contract. though  the au pair visa does not constitute the grounds for a settlement either work permit. the host family is responsible for the entry and return ticket to/from denmark if the au pair comes from a country outside the eu / eea or switzerland. in addition  the host family is responsible for a one-time fee  which is intended to cover part of the state s expenses for the danish language lessons.   === finland === an au pair s responsibilities also include light housework totaling six hours a day  five days a week. the au pair has her/his own room  is provided with food  and is paid a weekly allowance amounting to at least €252 per month (minimum set by finnish law). additionally  the host family will arrange a finnish or swedish language course to help the au pair communicate better with the children and get more out of his or her stay in finland. au pairs can stay with their host family for up to one year or negotiate a shorter stay. anyone  except citizens of the nordic countries or the eu/eea countries  wishing to work in finland as an au pair must apply for and receive a residence permit before entering finland. citizens of eu states 
iceland  norway  liechtenstein or switzerland must register their right to reside in finland  but they do not need a residence permit. the philippines does not permit its citizens to travel to europe as au pairs  and they are advised not to apply for a residence permit for this purpose.   === france === au pairing has long been a favored way for young women to learn french and  increasingly  for young men as well. the pocket money for au pairs in france is euro 60 per week  plus  in most cases  a 20 euro a week contribution to language classes  in paris families may also provide a carte navigo (urban travel pass) which is worth 95 euros (approximately). enrollment in a french language course is compulsory for non-european au pairs. while france does not have an official  government sponsored au pair program  a number of established agencies belong to ufaap  the union francaise des associations au pair  an umbrella group set up in 1999  based at europair services in paris. as such  many au pairs enter france using a student visa where au pairs are limited to working no more than 5 hours a day  30 hours a week  and pay is generally between 250–300 euros.  application criteriapotential au pairs must   be aged 17–27. have basic skills in french. be able to commit to a period of at least 10 months (most host families prefer au pairs who can stay for the school year from september to june). attend french language classes while in france (this is a requirement to obtain the long-stay au pair visa).   === germany === many independent agents are members of the au pair society which has two offices in germany and more than 40 members. the society’s web site carries contact details for its members with links to agency web sites. commercial au pair agencies do not charge a placement fee to incoming au pairs. the au-pair society e.v. is a member of the international au pair association (iapa) and is also in a committee ecaps (european committee for au-pair standards) where members of national organisation from several european countries have defined new standards for au-pair programme in europe. non-eu citizens no older than 24 can become au pairs through a german agency. americans and canadians do not need to apply for a residence and work permit before leaving their home countries  however  it is a general requirement that au pairs prove that they have studied german. the monthly pocket money for an au pair in germany was raised to 260 euros ($300+) in 2006. the majority of families also give their au pairs a monthly travel pass and other benefits such as a contribution to course fees or travel expenses.  application criteriapotential au pairs must   be 18–above.   === italy === in order to become an au pair in italy  au pairs need to 
 be between 18 and 30 years old have a good command in italian or english be entitled to a visa if they don t belong to any eu-country. in this case  the italian embassy placed at the au pair s home country will decide to approve or deny the au pair s application.the au pair program in italy establishes that   au pairs will work a maximum of 30 hours per week au pairs will have 4 weeks paid holiday for a 12-months stay au pairs will have at least one day off per week au pairs will earn a monthly amount of 260 euro au pairs will pay for the travel expenses to the host family s countryadditional information   au pairs who belong to a non-eu country member will have to apply for a visa. for that  visa requirements must be fulfilled and documents must be provided to the italian embassy placed in their home country au pairs from a non-eu country will need to close a private insurance from their home country au pairs who come from any eu-country can apply for the european health insurance cardit is possible to apply independently through an italian agency. there are many opportunities for au pairs during the summer holidays  when most italians who can afford au pairs migrate to the coast or the mountains and take their helpers with them. the weekly pocket money is 75–95 euro for working 30 hours a week  and 100–130 euro for 40 hours  though many families in larger cities pay more than this. non-european nationals are not eligible for a permesso di soggiorno (stay permit) unless they arrive with the appropriate visa from the italian embassy in their country. the best route is to obtain a student visa which permits the holder to work up to 20 hours per week (live-in or live-out). to obtain a long-stay visa  non-eu au pairs will need to enroll in and pay for an italian language course at  an approved school or college. the school registrar will issue a certificate which must then be stamped by the local police office (questura). the visa will be valid only for the length of the course. the applicant must show sufficient insurance coverage  a return air ticket  proof of accommodation stamped by the police and a contract specifying dates  pocket money and benefits stamped by the provincial labor office and/or the police. american citizens cannot legally work as au pairs on a working visa  the nulla osta will be denied because there are no labor agreements between the us and italy in regards to au pairs. if the applicant is already in italy she can check classified adverts in english language journals  many of which are published online such as wanted in rome aimed at the expatriate community  and notice boards in english language bookshops  english-speaking churches  student travel agencies  and language school notice boards.   === netherlands === au pairs may
only be placed with a host family in the netherlands through an au pair agency recognized by the immigration and naturalisation service (ind) of the netherlands. interested au pair candidates must be older than 18 but not yet 31 and interested in learning about dutch society and culture. if you are an eu citizen  you do not need a visa to work as an au pair in the netherlands. after you have been in the netherlands for three months  you must register with the ind. when you register  you must provide documents to verify the purpose of your stay. after registering  you will receive proof of registration in the form of a sticker  which will be attached to your passport (or other proof of identity). as a dutch national host family  if you wish to bring an au pair to the netherlands for longer than 3 months  you must meet the following conditions   your family must consist of a minimum of 2 persons you must support the au pair during his/her stay in the netherlands au pair is registered in the municipal personal records database (gba) your family must have sufficient income to support the au pair and yourselves family must publish a daily schedule of dutiesthe au pair must have the following documents and meet the following conditions   a valid passport health insurance that covers the au pair in the netherlands cannot be married cannot have dependents or be responsible for the care of his/her family members he/she does not constitute a risk to the public order he/she must undergo a tuberculosis test in the netherlands he/she is over 18 but not older than 31 he/she has not previously stayed in the netherlands on a residence permit he/she did not previously work for your family abroad he/she will only carry out light domestic work to assist your family he/she will work a maximum of 8 hours per day and a maximum of 30 hours per week  you will have 2 days off per weekplacement period an au pair in the netherlands is allowed to stay for a maximum of one year. duties providing childcare and doing light household chores are the main responsibilities. a daily schedule of duties is drawn up by the host family. pocket money in the netherlands  an au pair receives 300-340 euros pocket money per month. board and lodging an au pair receives free board and lodging  and is entitled to board and lodging in cases of illness and  holidays. working hours in the netherlands  the weekly working schedule of an au pair must not exceed a total of 30 hours. he/she may never work more than 8 hours a day or more than 5 days per week. additional babysitting for the host family or taking on a job on the side is also not allowed. free time an au pair in the netherlands is entitled to a minimum of two days off per week  however  these days do
not have to be consecutive. holiday an au pair in the netherlands is entitled to a minimum of 2 weeks paid holiday per 12 months. he/she and the host family can take this value as a basis for calculating the amount of holiday in case of a shorter placement. language course/cultural exchange an au pair is entitled to attend a language course. the host family assists in finding suitable offers within their area  and contributes 320 euros per year to a language course. the au pair programme in the netherlands is explicitly designed for a cultural exchange. therefore  the host family will help the au pair to experience dutch culture through various cultural activities.   === norway === the number of au pairs in norway have been on the rise since 2000  more than quadrupling between the years 2000 and 2014. 81 percent of au pairs were females from the philippines. in 2015  there were around 3000 au pairs in norway. to compare  in 2000  there were 691 au pairs with the permit to stay in norway.   ==== rights and regulations ==== as of october 2015  the host family is required to pay the au pair a minimum of nok 5600 per month (pre-tax) as pocket money/salary. since the au pair programme is a cultural exchange programme  the au pair also has the right to attend courses in norwegian. the host family must provide a minimum of nok 8400 pre-tax for the au pair s norwegian lessons and study materials. the au pair s additional rights include  among other things  free board and lodging  holiday pay in accordance with the holidays act  and one full day (24 hours) off per week. the au pair is required to pay taxes. according to regulations [as of 2016]  the period of work shall normally not exceed five hours per day  and the maximum shall be 30 hours a week .if a host family fails to follow the regulations  they can lose the right to have an au pair for one  two  or five years  according to a rule introduced in july 2013. if the host family commits an offence punishable by three months in prison or more  the host family quarantine could last up to 10 years.   ==== controversies regarding the au pair system ==== the au pair system has  in recent years  been a topic of dispute in the norwegian public. according to lawyer lene løvdal  “the au pair scheme is all about cheap in-house female work force. the majority of the au pairs in norway do not primarily come here for the cultural exchange. first and foremost they’re professional housemaids.” in 2013  the norwegian newspaper dagbladet reported that au pairs in norway occasionally show up at pta meetings  in the place of children s parents.a documentary about au pairs in norway  herskap og tenarar ( masters and servants )  was broadcast on
the tv channel nrk in 2013. the documentary examines the rights of au pairs in norway  and focuses particularly on recent cases of abuse and exploitation against some au pairs from the philippines. in 2016 the government cancelled funding for au-pair senteret (over the state budget)  in a dagsavisen article kadra yusuf said that  we have become a class-divided society and we have servantship. ... and the responsibility that goes along. the first step must be that the government keeps the au-pair center open. that  the masters (or the master race) can afford  or what    ==== 2017 scheduled trial of four employers ==== a trial is scheduled to be held from 3 january 2017 until 18 january. four persons - two married couples - are charged with wrongfully having claimed  that they only had one au pair  that the au pair was to participate in norwegian language courses  and that the person would not be working as a housekeeper. in addition  all are charged with having violated utlendingsloven ( foreigners act )  one count is in regard to trafficking of the type that is punishable for up to three years.   === spain === the minimum pocket money for au pairs is 55–60 euros a week. there are also opportunities for young people to stay with spanish families in exchange for speaking english with the children without having any domestic or childcare duties. according to the spanish ministry of foreign affairs  the holder of an au pair visa must be between 17 and 30 years of age. he/she has the following rights  among others   duration of the agreement  not longer than one year. participation in household chores and duties  not more than 5 hours daily. minimum of one complete free day a week.  for the student “au pair” to attend to religious activities  one free day a month must be a sunday. exact address where the student “au pair” will be residing with the host family  enjoying at the same time a certain degree of independence. determined monthly pocket money that the student “au pair” will receive. conditions that would allow either party to reject the placement agreement with an advance notice of two weeks.the embassy requires both an offer of employment from the family  and a letter from an authorized educational institution in spain  confirming the au pair s enrollment in a full-time course. the au pair must also provide  proof of economic means to cover living expenses and eventual return to the country of origin.    === sweden === there is no need for an agency in order to become an au pair in sweden. au pairs need to be between 18–30  have a valid passport  and not have any children. the swedish migration authorities require that the applicant has a definite interest in learning or using the swedish language. he or she is also required to have a certificate
of admission to a swedish course at time of application. au pairs should not work for more than 25 hours a week  and combined with studies cannot exceed 40 hours a week. the required monthly allowance is sek 3500 before tax.as for tasks and rights  the official swedish migration agency states   an au pair is a person who lives with another family and is paid for child minding and light housework . the purpose of their stay in sweden must be to obtain international experience and the opportunity to learn swedish language and culture.    === switzerland === the applicant must be a female between the ages of 17 (18 in geneva) and 29 from western europe  north america  australia  or new zealand  stay for a minimum of one year and a maximum of 18 months  and attend a minimum of three hours a week of language classes in zürich  four in geneva. families in most places are required to pay half the language school fees of 500–1 000 swiss francs for six months. au pairs in switzerland work for a maximum of 30 hours per week  plus babysitting once or twice a week. the monthly salary varies among cantons but the normal range is 590–740 swiss francs after all deductions for tax and health insurance have been made.   === united kingdom === au pairs now mainly come to the uk from the european economic area under european freedom of movement regulations. there are arrangements for romanian and bulgarian nationals wanting to come to the uk as au pairs. historically  au pairs came to the uk under an au pair immigration category  which was closed in november 2008 home office when a new points based system was introduced  which included a youth mobility scheme under tier 5 of the points based system youth mobility scheme for the nationals of australia  canada  japan  new zealand and monaco. in the uk  there are many au pair agencies that provide assistance to families looking to engage au pairs. these agencies are all privately owned and are not regulated by the uk government.   == north america ==   === canada === au pair programs do not exist in canada in the same format as the rest of the world. the canadian government has the live-in caregiver program  which has broader requirements than the au pair program. standard qualifications are regulated federally  though conditions of employment are determined at a provincial level. requirements include a minimum of six months of training or one year of compatible employment within the past three years  though exceptions and additional stipulations do apply. such regulations and complicating bureaucratic procedures are the driving force behind the creation of live-in caregiver (or nanny) placement agencies  who act as a mediator between families  caregivers  and the government - providing support for documentation and advice on the program.   === united states ===
interest in the au pair program in the united states began in 1987  when two educational and cultural exchange agencies were designated by the united states information agency (usia) to conduct a program under the fulbright–hays act of 1961. this  would allow foreign nationals the opportunity to live with an american host family and participate directly in the home life of the host family. after testing the program with approximately 200 au pairs  congress instructed that the program be continued. the au pair program was officially enacted in 1989. in that same year  the program was expanded to include four additional agencies  and these agencies together  became the original six government designated au pair organizations in the united states. the united states au pair program offers qualified young people the opportunity to live and study in the u.s. for one or two years in exchange for providing up to 45 hours of childcare per week. the au pair program was recently granted permission from the u.s. department of state to offer a second year extension au pair program (6  9 or 12 months)  as well as a summer au pair program. at the same time  the au pairs are required to complete an educational component of six semester hours of academic credit or its equivalent. at the end of one year  au pairs generally return to their home country  unless they and their host families choose to extend their stay for a further 6  9  or 12 months. alternatively  the au pair can choose to extend her period in the us with a different family. most au pairs choose a family in a different part of the country  allowing them to have a new experience. in the us  au pairs are provided a private bedroom  meals  compensation tied to the minimum wage ($195.75 per week as of 24 july 2009)  1 day off weekly plus a full weekend off each month  two weeks  paid vacation  and the first $500 toward the costs of required course work to be completed at an accredited institution of higher education in order to satisfy the requirements of the educational component of the program. au pairs are not to work more than 10 hours per day or 45 hours per week  and are not to serve as general housekeepers or assume responsibility for household management. the us educare au pair program is also available for families with school-age children. in this program  the au pair works a lower number of hours (not more than 10 hours a day and not more than 30 hours a week) for a weekly minimum wage of  $146.81. the family pays $1000 in educational expenses  and the au pair is required to complete 12 hours of academic credit. au pairs placed with families who have children under two years old must have at least 200 hours of child care experience with infants under two. au pairs
may only be placed in a family with an infant under three months old if a parent or other adult caregiver is also home and fully responsible for the infant. the au pair program is administered by the us department of state. participating families and au pairs must work with one of the currently 12 approved agencies. au pairs enter the united states on a j-1 visa. according to the internal revenue service  an au pair will almost always be a nonresident alien  and will be required to file a tax return on  form 1040nr or form 1040nr-ez to report his or her au pair wages. these wages  however  are not usually subject to social security and medicare taxes because of the au pair s status as a j-1 nonimmigrant and as a nonresident alien. however  if the au pair had previously been in the united states as a student  teacher  trainee  or researcher in f  j  m  or q nonimmigrant status  then the au pair might be a resident alien during his current stay in the united states  and might be subject to social security and medicare taxes if his annual au pair wages exceed the applicable dollar threshold found in irs publication 926. if the au pair is a resident alien and his or her annual au pair wages exceed the applicable dollar threshold  then the host family must withhold social security and medicare taxes and report them on schedule h of form 1040 and on form w-2. the host family must apply for an employer identification number (ein) if it is required to withhold tax and file form w-2.   ==== basic application criteria ==== potential au pairs must  be aged 18–26 (at the time of arrival) have no criminal record   ==== au pair program types in the united states ==== au pairs in the united states are categorized by program types. most au pair organizations in the united states classify au pairs by the following programs standard au pair program the standard au pair program is the most popular program available. standard au pairs can work up to 45 hours per week and no more than 10 hours per day. they are paid the standard stipend amount and fulfill the minimum educational requirement of 6 hours of academic credit or its equivalent during the program year. families hosting standard au pairs are required to provide (up to) the first $500 toward the cost of the au pair s academic course work. standard au pairs are usually available for a full year commitment and have a variety of qualifications. if a family has a child under the age of two  the au pair has to have at least 200 hours of experience. cost range between $7–8/hour. professional au pair program the professional au pair program is for families who need more than just a babysitter and have higher child care needs  due to a new baby  multiple
children or children with special needs. professional au pairs have degrees in child care related fields such as pre-school teacher  pediatric nursing or occupational therapy for children or one year full-time experience with children. a professional au pair can work up to 45 hours per week and no more than 10 hours per day. they are paid a higher stipend amount and fulfill the minimum educational requirement of 6 hours of academic credit or its equivalent during the program year. families hosting professional au pairs are required to provide (up to) the first $500 toward the cost of the au pair s academic course work. professional au pairs are usually available for a full year commitment and have a variety of qualifications. cost are typically higher for a special needs au pair. numerous agencies offer professional au pair programs including au pair international and proaupair. the educare program the educare program was created as an option for families with school aged children or families looking for part-time child care. according to the u.s. department of state  the educare au pair program applies to families who require childcare before and after school and may not be placed with families that have preschool aged children except if other  full-time childcare plans have been made. educare au pairs may work no more than 10 hours per day  and a maximum of 30 hours per week. au pairs participating in the educare component receive 75 percent of the weekly rate paid to non-educare participants. educare au pairs must complete a minimum of 12 hours of academic credit or its equivalent during their program year. the host family is required to provide (up to) the first $1 000 toward the cost of the au pair s required academic course work. the extension program when the au pair program started in the united states in 1989  au pairs were only allowed to stay in the country and work as au pairs for a 12-month period. in 2006  the u.s. department of state allowed au pairs to legally extend their stay and work for 6  9  or 12 additional months. the program s regulations state that the department of state may approve extensions for the au pair participants. the request for an extension beyond the maximum duration of the initial 12-month program must be submitted electronically to the department of homeland security s student and exchange visitor information system (sevis) no less than 30 calendar days prior to the expiration of the exchange visitor s initial authorized stay in any program. repeat participation in 2008  the u.s. department of state re-designated the au pair requirements and regulations an added a repeat participation clause that states a foreign national who enters the united states as an au pair exchange visitor program participant and who has successfully completed his or her program is eligible to participate again as an au pair participant  provided that he or she has resided outside the united states for at least two years following completion of
his or her initial au pair program. the au pair abroad program (the reciprocity clause) with the creation of the au pair program in the united states in 1989  the u.s. department of state also added a reciprocity clause in the general program requirements which states that in the conduct of their exchange programs  official au pair sponsor agencies shall make a good faith effort to achieve the fullest possible reciprocity in the exchange of persons. reciprocity means the participation of a us citizen in an educational and cultural program in a foreign country in exchange for the participation of a foreign national in the exchange visitor program.  reciprocity  is interpreted broadly here  unless otherwise specified  reciprocity does not require a one-for-one exchange or that exchange visitors be engaged in the same activity. for example  exchange visitors coming to the united states for training in american banking practices and americans going abroad to teach foreign nationals public administration would be considered a reciprocal exchange  when arranged or facilitated by the same sponsor. the au pair summer program (discontinued) the au pair summer program started in 2005  when the u.s. department of state ran a three-year pilot program. the program was extended for an additional year before it was discontinued in 2009. the au pair summer program faced logistical complications with ds-2019 forms  visa approvals around the world and lack of interest from american host families in this particular program. summer au pairs were exactly like standard au pairs  except their visas were granted for only a few months instead of a full year. since 2009  none of the 13 u.s. department of state sponsor agencies are allowed to offer this program for families in the united states.   ==== sponsoring au pair agencies in the united states ==== as of august 2019  the u.s. state department listed fifteen designated sponsoring au pair agencies. host families typically pay these agencies an application fee and a program fee which varies from $7 500 to $10 500  depending on the agency used. the program fees cover expenses related to the arrival of the au pair and compliance with regulations governing the program. these include airfare  medical insurance  mandatory 32-hour education session on child development and safety and other expenses. au pairs pay fees which vary depending on the us agency and the home country agency they use (if they do not apply directly to the us agency). au pair online profile an online profile is one of the most important steps for any au pair searching for a family. families using the profile to get to know the au pair before scheduling an interview. it is therefore crucial that au pairs have a professional profile that is accessible at all times with a fully working contact form. au pairs need to be aware that having private information publicly available could be dangerous. it is therefore important to have a private working email.   ==== chinese au pairs
in the us ==== the au pair concept was introduced in china in 2001 by the hhs center (the first au pair agency in china)  and was transcribed hu hui sheng in pinyin (互惠生). in 2007  negotiations between agencies in china and the united states were successful and the american cultural exchange (go au pair) became the first organization to bring a chinese au pair to the united states. in march 2007  hongbin yu of harbin was the first chinese au pair to arrive in the united states.chinese au pairs are desirable by american host families. the new york times and spiegel online international attribute this trend to the growing number of chinese baby adoptions and the desire of parents to teach their children mandarin  to capitalize on china s economic influence.   == notable au pairs == alice anderson  english assemblage artist  sculptor  and film-maker carol baumgartner  brazilian model aifric campbell  irish writer anna del conte  italian food writer julie ege  norwegian actress and former miss norway angela hartnett  english chef jamaica kincaid  antiguan-american author and harvard professor veronica maggio  swedish singer melissa müller  austrian journalist and author elin nordegren  model  former wife of tiger woods  daughter of barbro holmberg and thomas nordegren eva joly  norwegian-french magistrate sachi parker  american actress  daughter of shirley maclaine anna reid  british  journalist and author stella rimington  british  former director general of mi5 and author olivia riner  accused of and acquitted of the murder of kristie fischer marion ross  american actress ségolène royal  french politician jennifer saunders  english comedian  screenwriter  singer  and actress annie m. g. schmidt  dutch writer elke sommer  german actress yutte stensgaard  danish actress kristin scott thomas  english actress beate uhse-rotermund  german pilot and entrepreneur louise woodward  convicted of involuntary manslaughter   == see also == chinese au pairs in the united states student exchange program domestic helper au pair organizations in the united states european agreement on au pair placement   == references ==   == external links == help centre and information for au pairs in norway at norwegian people s aid how to become an au pair or nanny   == further reading == janie a. chuang  u.s. au pair program  labor exploitation and the myth of cultural exchange  harvard journal of law & gender  vol. 36  2013  p. 269–343.  an au pair is not a cleaning woman  online 13.06.2014.
a governess is a woman employed to teach and train children in a private household. in contrast to a nanny (formerly called a nurse)  she concentrates on teaching children  instead of taking on a role of duty. her charges are of school age rather than babies.the position of governess used to be common in well-off european families before the first world war  especially in the countryside where no suitable school existed nearby. parents  preference to educate their children at home—rather than send them away to boarding school for months at a time—varied across time and countries. governesses were usually in charge of girls and younger boys. when a boy was old enough  he left his governess for a tutor or a school. governesses are rarer now  except within large and wealthy households or royal families such as the saudi royal family and in remote regions such as outback australia. there has been a recent resurgence amongst families worldwide to employ governesses or full-time tutors. the reasons for this include personal security  the benefits of a tailored education  and the flexibility to travel or live in multiple locations.   == role == traditionally  governesses taught  the three rs  (reading  writing  and arithmetic)  to young children. they also taught the  accomplishments  expected of middle-class women to the young ladies under their care  such as french or another language  the piano or another musical instrument  and often painting (usually the more ladylike watercolours rather than oils) or poetry. it was also possible for other teachers (usually male) with specialist knowledge and skills to be brought in  such as  a drawing master or dancing master.   === in the united kingdom === the governess occupied a uniquely awkward position in the victorian household  because she was neither a servant nor yet a member of the host family. she worked in the upper-class home of the landed gentry or aristocracy. she herself had a middle-class background and education  yet was paid for her services. as a sign of this social limbo she frequently ate on her own  away from the rest of the family and servants. by definition  a governess was an unmarried woman who lived in someone else s home  which meant that she was subject to their rules. in any case  she had to maintain an impeccable reputation by avoiding anything which could embarrass or offend her employers. if a particular governess was young and attractive  the lady of the house might well perceive a potential threat to her marriage  and enforce the governess s social exclusion more rigorously. as a result of these various restrictions  the lifestyle of the typical victorian governess was often one of social isolation and solitude  without the opportunity to make friends. the fact that her presence in the household was underpinned by an employment contract emphasized that she could never truly be part of the host
family. however  being a governess was one of the few legitimate ways by which an unmarried middle class woman could support herself in victorian society. not surprisingly  her position was often depicted as one to be pitied  and the only way out of it was to get married. unfortunately  it was difficult for a governess to find a suitable husband because most of the eligible men she encountered were her social superiors  who preferred a bride from within their own social class  particularly since such women generally had better financial resources. once a governess s charges grew up  she had to seek a new position  or  exceptionally  might be retained by the grown-up daughter as a paid companion.   === outside the united kingdom === an option for the more adventurous was to find an appointment abroad. the russian empire proved to be a relatively well-paid option for many. according to harvey pitcher in when miss emmie was in russia  english governesses before  during and after the october revolution  as many as thousands of english-speaking governesses went there. as english became the fashionable language of choice among the aristocracy during the later days of the regime  clearly they were displacing opportunities formerly spread more across the french-speaking world. the estimate of numbers ( thousands )  although necessarily vague  is justified by some knowledge of the main lodging house used by those not accommodated with their host families  st. andrew s house  moscow  and by the places of worship they preferentially frequented  for example the church associated with the house. pitcher drew extensively on the archives of the governesses  benevolent institution in london  there is also some allusion to the phenomenon of governesses being engaged abroad in a galaxy of governesses by bea howe.   == notable governesses ==  katherine swynford  governess to the children of john of gaunt  and later became his mistress  the mother of his beaufort children  and his duchess. she was a great-great grandmother of henry vii of england through his mother lady margaret beaufort. margaret pole  countess of salisbury  governess to the future queen mary i of england. they were also third cousins (mary s paternal grandmother elizabeth of york was first cousins with margaret pole (their fathers edward iv and george plantagenet  1st duke of clarence  1st earl of salisbury  1st earl of warwick kg were brothers). kat ashley  governess to queen elizabeth i of england. madame de maintenon  who became the last mistress of louis xiv of france  gained entry to his inner circle as governess to his illegitimate offspring  the children of madame de montespan. mary wollstonecraft (1759-1797)  author of the early feminist classic a vindication of the rights of woman  worked as a governess in the household of the anglo-irish kingsborough family  where she greatly influenced margaret king. jane gardiner (1758-1840)  from
her mid-teens governess to the daughters of lady martin  and from 1780 to the children of lord ilchester. she was succeeded in this second post by agnes porter  whose memoirs were reprinted in 1998 as a governess in the age of jane austen. baroness louise lehzen and charlotte percy  duchess of northumberland  governesses to the future queen victoria. anne sullivan  the so-called miracle worker  who educated the remarkable deaf and blind girl helen keller. anna leonowens  governess to the harem of mongkut (monarch of what is now thailand). her memoirs were later novelised as anna and the king of siam  which in turn inspired the musical drama the king and i. edith cavell worked first as a governess before she trained as a nurse marie curie  who worked as a governess in multiple households to fund her education  later became one of the most influential women in the history of science. marion crawford ( crawfie )  governess of queen elizabeth ii and princess margaret. maria von trapp  the real-life inspiration for  the sound of music .   == fictional ==   === novels === several well-known works of fiction  particularly in the nineteenth century  have focused on governesses. the governess  or the little female academy (1749) is a collection of short stories for children  by sarah fielding jane austen s novel emma (1815) opens with the eponymous heroine losing miss taylor  the governess who had become a family companion  to marriage with mr. weston. later  jane fairfax feels the threat of being forced to become a governess if her covert attachment to frank churchill all comes to nothing. mary martha sherwood wrote the governess  or the little female academy in 1820. jane eyre  the protagonist in charlotte brontë s novel of that name (1847)  serves as a governess to the ward of her future husband  edward fairfax rochester. agnes grey by anne brontë the same year portrays a more realistic view of what life for a governess was like becky sharp  the main character in william makepeace thackeray s novel vanity fair (1847–48)  is employed as a governess. madame de la rougierre is the wicked and mentally unbalanced french governess to heiress orphan maud ruthyn in joseph sheridan le fanu s gothic novel uncle silas (1864). stiva  the brother of the eponymous heroine in anna karenina (1878)  had an affair with his children s governess. henry james s most famous governess is the over-sensitive and perhaps hysterical protagonist in the turn of the screw (1898). two of the sherlock holmes stories tell the tales of governesses  violet hunter  in  the adventure of the copper beeches  and violet smith  in  the adventure of the solitary cyclist . in addition  mary morstan  the wife of dr. john watson  used to be a governess. dante serves as governess to stephen dedalus and his siblings in james
joyce s a portrait of the artist as a young man (1916). in winifred watson s novel miss pettigrew lives for a day (1938)  the title character is a life-long governess who unexpectedly finds other employment. terry pratchett s discworld series features a governess named susan sto helit. eva ibbotson s children s novel journey to the river sea (2001) features arabella minton as governess to the main character. michel faber s historical fiction the crimson petal and the white (2002) features a clever woman  sugar  who climbs improbably from prostitution to governess in libba bray s gemma doyle trilogy (2003-2007)  the title character’s orphaned friend is brought up to be a governess. diane setterfield s gothic suspense novel the thirteenth tale (2006) develops parallels with jane eyre  including the role of the governess. in the jeanne-marie leprince de beaumont s writing containing dialogues between a governess and several young ladies of quality her scholars  which published in the young misses magazine magazine  she writes about the polite talks between ms. bonne and her class.   === in film === the governess is a 1998 british period drama film written and directed by sandra goldbacher. maggie evans/victoria winters is hired to be governess to david collins in the 2012 film dark shadows. miss mary (1986) stars julie christie as the eponymous english governess in pre-peron argentina.   === in television === soap opera dark shadows featured the character victoria winters as the governess to david collins. in star trek  voyager  captain kathryn janeway spends recreation time playing the role of a governess  lucille davenport  on the holodeck clara oswin oswald in the 2012 doctor who christmas special the snowmen   == other uses == the term  governess  is an archaic gendered job title for a politician  now the word  governor  is used for men or women. for example  keʻelikōlani was known as the governess of hawaii.anne hegerty  one of the chasers on the british and australian versions of the chase  is nicknamed  the governess .   == see also ==  english nanny & governess school home schooling   == references ==   == further reading == brandon  ruth  other people s daughters  the lives and times of the governess. 2008 broughton  trev and ruth symes  the governess  an anthology. stroud  sutton  1997. isbn 0-7509-1503-x budde  gunilla  als erzieherinnen in europa unterwegs  gouvernanten  governesses und gouvernantes  ego – european history online  mainz  institute of european history  2011  retrieved  21 february 2013. hughes  kathryn  the victorian governess  london  hambledon  1993. isbn 1-85285-002-7 peterson  m. jeanne   the victorian governess  status incongruence in family and society  in suffer and be still  women in the victorian age  ed. martha vicinus. bloomington  indiana university press  1972.   ==
external links == the victorian governess  a bibliography  at victorian web vam.ac.uk  richard redgrave s  the governess  discussed at the v&a museum.
a circus is a company of performers who put on diverse entertainment shows that may include clowns  acrobats  trained animals  trapeze acts  musicians  dancers  hoopers  tightrope walkers  jugglers  magicians  unicyclists  as well as other object manipulation and stunt-oriented artists. the term circus also describes the performance which has followed various formats through its 250-year modern history. although not the inventor of the medium  philip astley is credited as the father of the modern circus. in 1768 astley  a skilled equestrian  began performing exhibitions of trick horse riding in an open field called ha penny hatch on the south side of the thames river. in 1770 he hired acrobats  tightrope walkers  jugglers and a clown to fill in the pauses between the equestrian demonstrations and thus chanced on the format which was later named a  circus . performances developed significantly over the next fifty years  with large-scale theatrical battle reenactments becoming a significant feature. the traditional format  in which a ringmaster introduces a variety of choreographed acts set to music  developed in the latter part of the 19th century and remained the dominant format until the 1970s. as styles of performance have developed since the time of astley  so too have the types of venues where these circuses have performed. the earliest modern circuses were performed in open-air structures with limited covered seating. from the late 18th to late 19th century  custom-made circus buildings (often wooden) were built with various types of seating  a centre ring  and sometimes a stage. the traditional large tents commonly known as  big tops  were introduced in the mid-19th century as touring circuses superseded static venues. these tents eventually became the most common venue. contemporary circuses perform in a variety of venues including tents  theatres and casinos. many circus performances are still held in a ring  usually 13 m (42 ft) in diameter. this dimension was adopted by astley in the late 18th century as the minimum diameter that enabled an acrobatic horse rider to stand upright on a cantering horse to perform their tricks. contemporary circus has been credited with a revival of the circus tradition since the late 1970s  when a number of groups began to experiment with new circus formats and aesthetics  typically avoiding the use of animals to focus exclusively on human artistry. circuses within the movement have tended to favor a theatrical approach  combining character-driven circus acts with original music in a broad variety of styles to convey complex themes or stories. contemporary circus continues to develop new variations on the circus tradition while absorbing new skills  techniques and stylistic influences from other performing arts.   == etymology == first attested in english 14th century  the word circus derives from latin circus  which is the romanization of the greek κίρκος (kirkos)  itself a metathesis of the homeric greek κρίκος (krikos)  meaning  circle  or 
ring . in the book de spectaculis early christian writer tertullian claimed that the first circus games were staged by the goddess circe in honour of her father helios  the sun god.   == history ==  the modern and commonly held idea of a circus is of a big top with various acts providing entertainment therein. however  the history of circuses is more complex  with historians disagreeing on its origin  as well as revisions being done about the history due to the changing nature of historical research  and the ongoing circus phenomenon. for many  circus history begins with englishman philip astley  while for others its origins go back much further—to roman times.   === origins === in ancient rome  the circus was a building for the exhibition of horse and chariot races  equestrian shows  staged battles  gladiatorial combat and displays of (and fights with) trained animals. the circuses of rome were similar to the ancient greek hippodromes  although circuses served varying purposes and differed in design and construction  and for events that involved re-enactments of naval battles  the circus was flooded with water. the roman circus buildings were  however  not circular but rectangular with semi circular ends. the lower seats were reserved for persons of rank  there were also various state boxes for the giver of the games and his friends. the circus was the only public spectacle at which men and women were not separated.  some circus historians such as george speaight have stated  these performances may have taken place in the great arenas that were called  circuses  by the romans  but it is a mistake to equate these places  or the entertainments presented there  with the modern circus   others have argued that the lineage of the circus does go back to the roman circuses and a chronology of circus-related entertainment can be traced to roman times  continued by the hippodrome of constantinople that operated until the 13th century  through medieval and renaissance jesters  minstrels and troubadours to the late 18th century and the time of astley.  the first circus in the city of rome was the circus maximus  in the valley between the palatine and aventine hills.  it was constructed during the monarchy and  at first  built completely from wood. after being rebuilt several times  the final version of the circus maximus could seat 250 000 people  it was built of stone and measured 400m in length and 90m in width. next in importance were the circus flaminius and the circus neronis  from the notoriety which it obtained through the circensian pleasures of nero. a fourth circus was constructed by maxentius  its ruins have helped archaeologists reconstruct the roman circus. for some time after the fall of rome  large circus buildings fell out of use as centres of mass entertainment. instead  itinerant performers  animal trainers and
showmen travelled between towns throughout europe  performing at local fairs.    === modern format ===   ==== astley and early british circus ====  the origin of the modern circus has been attributed to philip astley  who was born 1742 in newcastle-under-lyme  england. he became a cavalry officer who set up the first modern amphitheatre for the display of horse riding tricks in lambeth  london on 4 april 1768. astley did not originate trick horse riding  nor was he first to introduce acts such as acrobats and clowns to the english public  but he was the first to create a space where all these acts were brought together to perform a show. astley rode in a circle rather than a straight line as his rivals did  and thus chanced on the format of performing in a circle. astley performed stunts in a 42 ft diameter ring  which is the standard size used by circuses ever since. astley referred to the performance arena as a circle and the building as an amphitheatre  these would later be known as a circus. in 1770 astley hired acrobats  tightrope walkers  jugglers and a clown to fill in the pauses between acts.astley was followed by andrew ducrow  whose feats of horsemanship had much to do with establishing the traditions of the circus  which were perpetuated by hengler s and sanger s celebrated shows in a later generation. in england circuses were often held in purpose-built buildings in large cities  such as the london hippodrome  which was built as a combination of the circus  the menagerie and the variety theatre  where wild animals such as lions and elephants from time to time appeared in the ring  and where convulsions of nature such as floods  earthquakes and volcanic eruptions have been produced with an extraordinary wealth of realistic display. joseph grimaldi  the first mainstream clown  had his first major role as little clown in the pantomime the triumph of mirth  or  harlequin s wedding in 1781. the royal circus was opened in london on 4 november 1782 by charles dibdin (who coined the term  circus )  aided by his partner charles hughes  an equestrian performer. in 1782  astley established the amphithéâtre anglais in paris  the first purpose-built circus in france  followed by 18 other permanent circuses in cities throughout europe. astley leased his parisian circus to the italian antonio franconi in 1793. in 1826  the first circus took place under a canvas big top.   ==== ricketts and the first american circus ==== the scotsman john bill ricketts brought the first modern circus to the united states. he began his theatrical career with hughes royal circus in london in the 1780s  and travelled from england in 1792 to establish his first circus in philadelphia. the first circus building in the us opened on april 3  1793 in philadelphia  where ricketts gave america
s first complete circus performance. george washington attended a performance there later that season.   ==== expansion of the american format ==== in the americas during the first two decades of the 19th century  the circus of pepin and breschard toured from montreal to havana  building circus theatres in many of the cities it visited. victor pépin  a native new yorker  was the first american to operate a major circus in the united states. later the establishments of purdy  welch & co.  and of van amburgh gave a wider popularity to the circus in the united states. in 1825  joshuah purdy brown was the first circus owner to use a large canvas tent for the circus performance. circus pioneer dan rice was the most famous pre-civil war circus clown  popularizing such expressions as  the one-horse show  and  hey  rube . the american circus was revolutionized by p. t. barnum and william cameron coup  who launched the travelling p. t. barnum s museum  menagerie & circus  the first freak show. coup also introduced the first multiple-ring circuses  and was also the first circus entrepreneur to use circus trains to transport the circus between towns.    ==== touring ==== in 1838  the equestrian thomas taplin cooke returned to england from the united states  bringing with him a circus tent. at this time  itinerant circuses were becoming popular in britain.  william batty s circus  for example  between 1838 and 1840  travelled from newcastle to edinburgh and then to portsmouth and southampton. pablo fanque  who is noteworthy as britain s only black circus proprietor and who operated one of the most celebrated travelling circuses in victorian england  erected temporary structures for his limited engagements or retrofitted existing structures. one such structure in leeds  which fanque assumed from a departing circus  collapsed  resulting in minor injuries to many but the death of fanque s wife.  three important circus innovators were the italian giuseppe chiarini  and frenchmen louis soullier and jacques tourniaire  whose early travelling circuses introduced the circus to latin america  australia  southeast asia  china  south africa and russia. soullier was the first circus owner to introduce chinese acrobatics to the european circus when he returned from his travels in 1866  and tourniaire was the first to introduce the performing art to ranga  where it became extremely popular.   after an 1881 merger with james anthony bailey and james l. hutchinson s circus and barnum s death in 1891  his circus travelled to europe as the barnum & bailey greatest show on earth  where it toured from 1897 to 1902  impressing other circus owners with its large scale  its touring techniques (including the tent and circus train)  and its combination of circus acts  a zoological exhibition and a freak show. this format was adopted by european circuses at the turn
of the 20th century. the influence of the american circus brought about a considerable change in the character of the modern circus. in arenas too large for speech to be easily audible  the traditional comic dialog of the clown assumed a less prominent place than formerly  while the vastly increased wealth of stage properties relegated to the background the old-fashioned equestrian feats  which were replaced by more ambitious acrobatic performances  and by exhibitions of skill  strength and daring  requiring the employment of immense numbers of performers and often of complicated and expensive machinery.  from the late 19th century through the first half of the 20th century  travelling circuses were a major form of spectator entertainment in the us and attracted huge attention whenever they arrived in a city. after world war ii  the popularity of the circus declined as new forms of entertainment (such as television) arrived and the public s tastes became more sophisticated. from the 1960s onward  circuses attracted growing criticism from animal rights activists. many circuses went out of business or were forced to merge with other circus companies. nonetheless  a good number of travelling circuses are still active in various parts of the world  ranging from small family enterprises to three-ring extravaganzas. other companies found new ways to draw in the public with innovative new approaches to the circus form itself.   ==== russia ==== in 1919  lenin  head of the ussr  expressed a wish for the circus to become  the people s art-form  with facilities and status on par with theatre  opera and ballet. the ussr nationalized russian circuses. in 1927  the state university of circus and variety arts  better known as the moscow circus school  was established  performers were trained using methods developed from the soviet gymnastics program. when the moscow state circus company began international tours in the 1950s  its levels of originality and artistic skill were widely applauded.   ==== china ==== circuses from china  drawing on chinese traditions of acrobatics  like the chinese state circus are also popular touring acts.   === contemporary circus ===  contemporary circus (originally known as nouveau cirque) is a performing arts movement that originated in the 1970s in australia  canada  france  the west coast of the united states  and the united kingdom. contemporary circus combines traditional circus skills and theatrical techniques to convey a story or theme. compared with the traditional circus  the contemporary genre of circus tends to focus more attention on the overall aesthetic impact  on character and story development  and on the use of lighting design  original music  and costume design to convey thematic or narrative content. for aesthetic or economic reasons  contemporary circus productions may sometimes be staged in theatres rather than in large outdoor tents. music used in the production is often composed exclusively for that production  and aesthetic influences are drawn as
much from contemporary culture as from circus history.  animal acts appear rarely in contemporary circus  in contrast to traditional circus  where animal acts have often been a significant part of the entertainment. early pioneers of the contemporary circus genre included  circus oz  forged in australia in 1977 from soapbox circus (1976) and new circus (1973)  the pickle family circus  founded in san francisco in 1975  ra-ra zoo in 1984 in london  nofit state circus in 1984 from wales  cirque du soleil  founded in quebec in 1984  cirque plume and archaos from france in 1984 and 1986 respectively. more recent examples include  cirque éloize (founded in quebec in 1993)  sweden s cirkus cirkör (1995)  teatro zinzanni (founded in seattle in 1998)  the west african circus baobab (late 1990s)  and montreal s les 7 doigts de la main (founded in 2002). the genre includes other circus troupes such as the vermont-based circus smirkus (founded in 1987 by rob mermin) and le cirque imaginaire (later renamed le cirque invisible  both founded and directed by victoria chaplin  daughter of charlie chaplin). the most conspicuous success story in the contemporary genre has been that of cirque du soleil  the canadian circus company whose estimated annual revenue now exceeds us$810 million  and whose nouveau cirque shows have been seen by nearly 90 million spectators in over 200 cities on five continents.   == performance ==  a traditional circus performance is often led by a ringmaster who has a role similar to a master of ceremonies. the ringmaster presents performers  speaks to the audience  and generally keeps the show moving. the activity of the circus traditionally takes place within a ring  large circuses may have multiple rings  like the six-ringed moscow state circus. a circus often travels with its own band  whose instrumentation in the united states has traditionally included brass instruments  drums  glockenspiel  and sometimes the distinctive sound of the calliope.   === acts ===  common acts include a variety of acrobatics  gymnastics (including tumbling and trampoline)  aerial acts (such as trapeze  aerial silk  corde lisse)  contortion  stilts  and a variety of other routines. juggling is one of the most common acts in a circus  the combination of juggling and gymnastics is called equilibristics and includes acts like plate spinning and the rolling globe. acts like these are some of the most common and the most traditional. clowns are common to most circuses and are typically skilled in many circus acts   clowns getting into the act  is a very familiar theme in any circus. famous circus clowns have included austin miles  the fratellini family  rusty russell  emmett kelly  grock  and bill irwin. daredevil stunt acts and sideshow acts are also parts of some circus acts  these activities may include human cannonball  chapeaugraphy  fire eating  breathing
 and dancing  knife throwing  magic shows  sword swallowing  or strongman. famous sideshow performers include zip the pinhead and the doll family. a popular sideshow attraction from the early 19th century was the flea circus  where fleas were attached to props and viewed through a fresnel lens.   === animal acts ===  a variety of animals have historically been used in acts. while the types of animals used vary from circus to circus  big cats (namely lions  tigers  and leopards)  camels  llamas  elephants  zebras  horses  donkeys  birds (like parrots  doves  and cockatoos)  sea lions  bears  monkeys  and domestic animals such as cats and dogs are the most common. the earliest involvement of animals in circus was just the display of exotic creatures in a menagerie. going as far back as the early eighteenth century  exotic animals were transported to north america for display  and menageries were a popular form of entertainment. the first true animals acts in the circus were equestrian acts. soon elephants and big cats were displayed as well. isaac a. van amburgh entered a cage with several big cats in 1833  and is generally considered to be the first wild animal trainer in american circus history. mabel stark was a famous female tiger-tamer.   ==== controversy and laws ====  animal rights groups have documented many cases of animal cruelty in the training of performing circus animals. the animal rights group people for the ethical treatment of animals (peta) contends that animals in circuses are frequently beaten into submission and that physical abuse has always been the method for training circus animals. it is also alleged that the animals are kept in cages that are too small and are given very little opportunity to walk around outside of their enclosure  thereby violating their right to freedom.   ===== in the united states ===== according to peta  although the us animal welfare act does not permit any sort of punishment that puts the animals in discomfort  trainers will still go against this law and use such things as electric rods and bull hooks. according to peta  during an undercover investigation of carson & barnes circus  video footage was captured showing animal care director tim frisco training endangered asian elephants with electrical shock prods and instructing other trainers to  beat the elephants with a bullhook as hard as they can and sink the sharp metal hook into the elephant s flesh and twist it until they scream in pain .on behalf of the ministry of agriculture  nature and food quality of the netherlands  wageningen university conducted an investigation into the welfare of circus animals in 2008. the following issues  among others  were found   71% of the observed animals had medical problems. 33% of tigers and lions did not have access to an outdoor enclosure. lions spend on average 98% of their
time indoors. an average enclosure for tigers is only 5 m2. elephants are shackled in chains for 17 hours a day on average. elephants spend on average 10 hours a day showing stereotypic behaviour. tigers are terrified of fire but are still forced to jump through fire rings. since 1990 there have been over 123 cases of lion attacks at circuses. animals are trained through discipline.based on these findings  the researchers called for more stringent regulation regarding the welfare of circus animals. in 2012  the dutch government announced a ban on the use of wild circus animals.in testimony in u.s. district court in 2009  ringling bros. and barnum & bailey circus ceo kenneth feld acknowledged that circus elephants are struck behind the ears  under the chin and on their legs with metal tipped prods  called bull hooks. feld stated that these practices are necessary to protect circus workers. feld also acknowledged that an elephant trainer was reprimanded for using an electric shock device  known as a hot shot or electric prod  on an elephant  which feld also stated was appropriate practice. feld denied that any of these practices harm elephants.  in its january 2010 verdict on the case  brought against feld entertainment international by the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals et al.  the court ruled that evidence against the circus company was  not credible with regard to the allegations . in lieu of a usda hearing  feld entertainment inc. (parent of ringling bros.) agreed to pay an unprecedented $270 000 fine for violations of the animal welfare act that allegedly occurred between june 2007 and august 2011.a 14-year litigation against the ringling bros. and barnum & bailey circus came to an end in 2014 when the humane society of the united states and a number of other animal rights groups paid a $16 million settlement to feld entertainment.  however  the circus closed in may 2017 after a 146-year run when it experienced a steep decline in ticket sales during the year after it discontinued its elephant act and sent its pachyderms to a reserve.on february 1  1992 at the great american circus in palm bay  florida  an elephant named janet (1965 – february 1  1992) went out of control while giving a ride to a mother  her two children  and three other children. the elephant then stampeded through the circus grounds outside before being shot to death by police. also  during a circus international performance in honolulu  hawaii on 20 august 1994  an elephant called tyke (1974 – august 20  1994) killed her trainer  allen campbell  and severely mauled her groomer  dallas beckwith  in front of hundreds of spectators. tyke then bolted from the arena and ran through the streets of kakaako for more than thirty minutes. police fired 86 shots at tyke  who eventually collapsed from the wounds and died.in december of 2018  new jersey became the
first state in the u.s. to ban circuses  carnivals and fairs from featuring elephants  tigers and other exotic animals.   ===== in the united kingdom ===== in 1998 in the united kingdom  a parliamentary working group chaired by mp roger gale studied living conditions and treatment of animals in uk circuses. all members of this group agreed that a change in the law was needed to protect circus animals. gale told the bbc   it s undignified and the conditions under which they are kept are woefully inadequate—the cages are too small  the environments they live in are not suitable and many of us believe the time has come for that practice to end.  the group reported concerns about boredom and stress  and noted that an independent study by a member of the wildlife conservation research unit at oxford university  found no evidence that circuses contribute to education or conservation.  however  in 2007  a different working group under the uk department for environment  food and rural affairs  having reviewed information from experts representing both the circus industry and animal welfare  found an absence of  scientific evidence sufficient to demonstrate that travelling circuses are not compatible with meeting the welfare needs of any type of non-domesticated animal presently being used in the united kingdom.  according to that group s report  published in october 2007   there appears to be little evidence to demonstrate that the welfare of animals kept in travelling circuses is any better or any worse than that of animals kept in other captive environments. a ban prohibiting the use of wild animals in circuses in britain was due to be passed in 2015  but conservative mp christopher chope repeatedly blocked the bill under the reasoning that  the eu membership costs and benefits bill should have been called by the clerk before the circuses bill  so i raised a point of order . he explained that the circus bill was  at the bottom of the list  for discussion. the animal defenders international non-profit group dubbed this  a huge embarrassment for britain that 30 other nations have taken action before us on this simple and popular measure .  on may 1  2019 environmental secretary michael gove announced a new bill to ban the use of wild animals in traveling circuses.   ===== worldwide =====  there are nationwide bans on using some if not all animals in circuses in india  iran  israel  singapore  austria  belgium  bosnia and herzegovina  bulgaria  croatia  czech republic  cyprus  denmark  estonia  finland  greece  hungary  ireland  italy  malta  netherlands  norway  poland  portugal  slovenia  sweden  switzerland  bolivia  colombia  costa rica  ecuador  el salvador  mexico  panama  paraguay and peru. germany  spain  united kingdom  australia  argentina 
chile  brazil  canada  and the united states have locally restricted or banned the use of animals in entertainment. in response to a growing popular concern about the use of animals in entertainment  animal-free circuses are becoming more common around the world. in 2009  bolivia passed legislation banning the use of any animals  wild or domestic  in circuses. the law states that circuses  constitute an act of cruelty.  circus operators had one year from the bill s passage on july 1  2009 to comply. in 2018 in germany  an accident with an elephant during a circus performance  prompted calls to ban animal performances in circuses. peta called the german politicians to outlaw the keeping of animals for circuses.a survey confirmed that on average  wild animals spend around 99 to 91 percent of their time in cages  wagons  or enclosure due to transportation. this causes a huge amount of distress to animals and leads to excessive amounts of drooling.city ordinances banning performances by wild animals have been enacted in san francisco (2015)  los angeles (2017)  and new york city (2017). these bans include movies  tv shows  ads  petting zoos  or any showcase of animals where they are in direct contact with the audience. the reason being the high chance of the animals to harm someone in the audience. this is due to their instincts which humans cannot control.greece became the first european country to ban any animal from performing in any circus in its territory in february 2012  following a campaign by animal defenders international and the greek animal welfare fund (gawf).on june 6  2015  the federation of veterinarians of europe adopted a position paper in which it recommends the prohibition of the use of wild animals in traveling circuses.despite the contemporary circus  shift toward more theatrical techniques and its emphasis on human rather than animal performance  traditional circus companies still exist alongside the new movement.  numerous circuses continue to maintain animal performers  including universoul circus and the big apple circus from the united states  circus krone from munich  circus royale and lennon bros circus from australia  vazquez hermanos circus  circo atayde hermanos  and hermanos mayaror circus from mexico  and moira orfei circus from italy  to name just a few.   == buildings ==  in some towns  there are circus buildings where regular performances are held. the best known are   blackpool tower circus budapest circus circus krone building in munich cirque d hiver  paris cirque jules verne in amiens hippodrome circus  great yarmouth la tohu in montreal moscow circus on tsvetnoy boulevard in moscow shanghai circus world in shanghai turkmen state circus in ashgabat riga circus in riga belarus state circus in minsk  globus  circus in bucharestin other countries  purpose-built circus buildings still exist which are no longer used as circuses  or are used for circus only occasionally
among a wider programme of events  for example  the cirkusbygningen (the circus building) in copenhagen  denmark  cirkus in stockholm  sweden  or carré theatre in amsterdam  netherlands.   == international awards == the international circus festival of monte-carlo has been held in monaco since 1974 and was the first of many international awards for circus performers.   == in art  music  films  plays and books ==  the atmosphere of the circus has served as a dramatic setting for many musicians. the most famous circus theme song is called  entrance of the gladiators  and was composed in 1904 by julius fučík. other circus music includes  el caballero   quality plus   sunnyland waltzes   the storming of el caney   pahjamah   bull trombone   big time boogie   royal bridesmaid march   the baby elephant walk   liberty bell march   java  strauss s  radetsky march  and  pageant of progress .  a poster for pablo fanque s circus royal  one of the most popular circuses of victorian england  inspired john lennon to write being for the benefit of mr. kite  on the beatles  album  sgt. pepper s lonely hearts club band.  the song title refers to william kite  a well-known circus performer in the 19th century. producer george martin and emi engineers created the song s fairground atmosphere by assembling a sound collage of collected recordings of calliopes and fairground organs  which they cut into strips of various lengths  threw into a box  and then mixed up and edited together randomly  creating a long loop which was mixed into the final production. another traditional circus song is the john philip sousa march  stars and stripes forever  which is played only to alert circus performers of an emergency. plays set in a circus include the 1896 musical the circus girl by lionel monckton  polly of the circus written in 1907 by margaret mayo  he who gets slapped written by russian leonid andreyev 1916 and later adapted into one of the first circus films  katharina knie written in 1928 by carl zuckmayer and adapted for the english stage in 1932 as caravan by playwright cecily hamilton  the revue big top written by herbert farjeon in 1942  top of the ladder written by tyrone guthrie in 1950  stop the world  i want to get off written by anthony newley in 1961  and barnum with music by cy coleman and lyrics and book by mark bramble  roustabout  the great circus train wreck written by jay torrence in 2006. following world war i  circus films became popular. in 1924 he who gets slapped was the first film released by mgm  in 1925 sally of the sawdust (remade 1930)  variety  and vaudeville were produced  followed by the devil s circus
in 1926 and the circus starring charlie chaplin  circus rookies  4 devils  and laugh clown laugh in 1928. german film salto mortale about trapeze artists was released in 1931 and remade in the united states and released as trapeze starring burt lancaster in 1956  in 1932 freaks was released  charlie chan at the circus  circus (ussr) and the three maxiums were released in 1936 and at the circus starring the marx brothers and you can t cheat an honest man in 1939. circus films continued to be popular during the second world war  films from this era included the great profile starring john barrymore (1940)  the animated disney film dumbo (1941)  road show (1941)  the wagons roll at night (1941) and captive wild woman (1943). tromba  a film about a tiger trainer  was released in 1948. in 1952 cecil b. de mille s oscar-winning film the greatest show on earth was first shown. released in 1953 were man on a tightrope and ingmar bergman s gycklarnas afton (released as sawdust and tinsel in the united states)  these were followed by life is a circus  ring of fear  3 ring circus (1954) and la strada (1954)  an oscar-winning film by federico fellini about a girl who is sold to a circus strongman. fellini made a second film set in the circus called the clowns in 1970. films about the circus made since 1959 include disney s toby tyler (1960)  the b-movie circus of horrors (also in 1960)  the musical film billy rose s jumbo (1962)  a tiger walks  a disney film about a tiger that escapes from the circus  and circus world (1964)  starring john wayne. mera naam joker (1970) a hindi drama film directed by raj kapoor which was about a clown who must make his audience laugh at the cost of his own sorrows.  in the film jungle emperor leo (1997)  leo s son lune is captured and placed in a circus  which burns down when a tiger knocks down a ring of fire while jumping through it. the greatest showman  a musical film loosely based on the life of p. t. barnum  was released in 2017.  the tv series circus humberto  based on the novel by eduard bass  follows the history of the circus family humberto between 1826 and 1924. the setting of the hbo television series carnivàle  which ran from 2003 to 2005  is also largely set in a travelling circus. the circus has also inspired many writers. numerous books  both non-fiction and fiction  have been published about circus life. notable examples of circus-based fiction include circus humberto by eduard bass  cirque du freak by darren shan  and spangle by gary jennings.  the novel water for elephants by sara gruen tells the fictional tale of a circus veterinarian and was made into a movie with the same title  starring robert pattinson
and reese witherspoon. circus is the central theme in comic books of super commando dhruva  an indian comic book superhero. according to this series  dhruva was born and brought up in a fictional indian circus called jupiter circus. when a rival circus burnt down jupiter circus  killing everyone in it  including dhruva s parents  dhruva vowed to become a crime fighter. a circus-based television series called circus was also telecast in india in 1989 on dd national  starring shahrukh khan as the lead actor.   == see also == animal training chautauqua  tent shows that preceded american circus circus clown clown alley circus skills cirque du soleil clown contemporary circus dog and pony show flea circus international circus festival of monte-carlo traveling carnival lion taming list of circuses and circus owners   == notes ==   == references == assael  brenda   circus and victorian society  2005  university of virginia press  charlottesville isbn 0-8139-2340-9 croft-cooke  rupert and cotes  peter. 1976. circus  a world history. elek. london isbn 0-236-40051-7 johnson  william m. 1990. the rose-tinted menagerie. iridescent publishing nance  susan. entertaining elephants  animal agency and the business of the american circus (johns hopkins university press  2013) 304 pages   elephants as  actors  or creatures of agency in the american circus from 1800 to 1940. speaight  george   a history of the circus  1980  the tantivy press  london isbn 0-4980-2470-9 stoddart  helen   rings of desire  circus history and representation  2000  manchester university press  manchester isbn 0-7190-5234-3  this article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain  chisholm  hugh  ed. (1911).  circus . encyclopædia britannica. 6 (11th ed.). cambridge university press. pp. 390–391. tertullian  septimus florens. de spectaculis  latin text with english translation by terrot reaveley glover. loeb classical library 1931.   == further reading == adams  katherine h. (2012). women of the american circus  1880-1940. mcfarland and company  inc.  publishers. isbn 9780786472284. dfening  fred d.  iii (november 2007).  the american circus in the 1870s  an overview from newspaper sources . bandwagon. 51 (6)  4–60. issn 0005-4968.—provides an overview of  low-yield research  into the history of the american circus as covered in  ragcontent newspapers [and] magazines [such as] white tops  brooke  bob (october–november 2001).  step right up  bob brooke presents the history of the circus in america . history magazine. simon  linda. the greatest shows on earth  a history of the circus (reaktion books  distributed by university of chicago press  2014)  296 pages    == external links == circus at curlie dictionary of circus slang (american and british/european) history of american circuses and sideshows circopedia national museum of performing arts  theatre museum. circus guided tour the philip astley project
a writer is a person who uses written words in various styles and techniques to communicate their ideas. writers produce various forms of literary art and creative writing such as novels  short stories  poetry  plays  screenplays  and essays as well as various reports and news articles that may be of interest to the public. writers  texts are published across a range of media. skilled writers who are able to use language to express ideas well  often contribute significantly to the cultural content of a society.the term  writer  is also used elsewhere in the arts – such as songwriter – but as a standalone  writer  normally refers to the creation of written language. some writers work from an oral tradition. writers can produce material across a number of genres  fictional or non-fictional. other writers use multiple media – for example  graphics or illustration – to enhance the communication of their ideas. another recent demand has been created by civil and government readers for the work of non-fictional technical writers  whose skills create understandable  interpretive documents of a practical or scientific nature. some writers may use images (drawing  painting  graphics) or multimedia to augment their writing. in rare instances  creative writers are able to communicate their ideas via music as well as words.as well as producing their own written works  writers often write on how they write (that is  the process they use)  why they write (that is  their motivation)  and also comment on the work of other writers (criticism). writers work professionally or non-professionally  that is  for payment or without payment and may be paid either in advance (or on acceptance)  or only after their work is published. payment is only one of the motivations of writers and many are never paid for their work. the term writer is often used as a synonym of author  although the latter term has a somewhat broader meaning and is used to convey legal responsibility for a piece of writing  even if its composition is anonymous  unknown or collaborative.   == types == writers choose from a range of literary genres to express their ideas. most writing can be adapted for use in another medium. for example  a writer s work may be read privately or recited or performed in a play or film. satire for example  may be written as a poem  an essay  a film  a comic play  or a piece of journalism. the writer of a letter may include elements of criticism  biography  or journalism. many writers work across genres. the genre sets the parameters but all kinds of creative adaptation have been attempted  novel to film  poem to play  history to musical. writers may begin their career in one genre and change to another. for example  historian william dalrymple began in the genre of travel literature and also writes as
a journalist. many writers have produced both fiction and non-fiction works and others write in a genre that crosses the two. for example  writers of historical romances  such as georgette heyer  invent characters and stories set in historical periods. in this genre  the accuracy of the history and the level of factual detail in the work both tend to be debated. some writers write both creative fiction and serious analysis  sometimes using different names to separate their work. dorothy sayers  for example  wrote crime fiction but was also a playwright  essayist  translator  and critic.   === literary and creative ===   ==== poet ====  poets make maximum use of the language to achieve an emotional and sensory effect as well as a cognitive one. to create these effects  they use rhyme and rhythm and they also exploit the properties of words with a range of other techniques such as alliteration and assonance. a common theme is love and its vicissitudes. shakespeare s famous love story romeo and juliet  for example  written in a variety of poetic forms  has been performed in innumerable theaters and made into at least eight cinematic versions. john donne is another poet renowned for his love poetry.   ==== novelist ====  novelists write novels – stories that explore universal themes through fiction. they situate invented characters and plots in a narrative designed to be both credible and entertaining.  every novel worthy of the name is like another planet  whether large or small  which has its own laws just as it has its own flora and fauna. thus  faulkner s technique is certainly the best one with which to paint faulkner s world  and kafka s nightmare has produced its own myths that make it communicable. benjamin constant  stendhal  eugène fromentin  jacques rivière  radiguet  all used different techniques  took different liberties  and set themselves different tasks.françois mauriac  novelist   ==== satirist ====  a satirist uses wit to ridicule the shortcomings of society or individuals  with the intent of exposing stupidity. usually  the subject of the satire is a contemporary issue such as ineffective political decisions or politicians  although human vices such as greed are also a common and universal subject. philosopher voltaire wrote a satire about optimism called candide  which was subsequently turned into an opera  and many well known lyricists wrote for it. there are elements of absurdism in candide  just as there are in the work of contemporary satirist barry humphries  who writes comic satire for his character dame edna everage to perform on stage. satirists use various techniques such as irony  sarcasm  and hyperbole to make their point and they choose from the full range of genres – the satire may be in the form of prose or poetry or dialogue in a film  for example. one of the most famous satirists
is jonathan swift who wrote the four-volume work gulliver s travels and many other satires  including a modest proposal and the battle of the books.  it is amazing to me that ... our age is almost wholly illiterate and has hardly produced one writer upon any subject.jonathan swift  satirist (1704)   ==== short story writer ====  a short story writer is a writer of short stories  works of fiction that can be read in a single sitting.   === performative ===   ==== librettist ====  libretti (the plural of libretto) are the texts for musical works such as operas. the venetian poet and librettist lorenzo da ponte  for example  wrote the libretto for some of mozart s greatest operas. luigi illica and giuseppe giacosa were italian librettists who wrote for giacomo puccini. most opera composers collaborate with a librettist but unusually  richard wagner wrote both the music and the libretti for his works himself.  chi son  sono poeta. che cosa faccio  scrivo. e come vivo  vivo. ( who am i  i m a poet. what do i do  i write. and how do i live  i live. )rodolpho  in puccini s la bohème   ==== lyricist ====  usually writing in verses and choruses  a lyricist specializes in writing lyrics  the words that accompany or underscore a song or opera. lyricists also write the words for songs. in the case of tom lehrer  these were satirical. lyricist noël coward  who wrote musicals and songs such as  mad dogs and englishmen  and the recited song  i went to a marvellous party  also wrote plays and films and performed on stage and screen as well. writers of lyrics  such as these two  adapt other writers  work as well as create entirely original pieces.  making lyrics feel natural  sit on music in such a way that you don t feel the effort of the author  so that they shine and bubble and rise and fall  is very  very hard to do.stephen sondheim  lyricist   ==== playwright ====  a playwright writes plays which may or may not be performed on a stage by actors. a play s narrative is driven by dialogue. like novelists  playwrights usually explore a theme by showing how people respond to a set of circumstances. as writers  playwrights must make the language and the dialogue succeed in terms of the characters who speak the lines as well as in the play as a whole. since most plays are performed  rather than read privately  the playwright has to produce a text that works in spoken form and can also hold an audience s attention over the period of the performance. plays tell  a story the audience should care about  so writers have to cut anything that worked against that. plays may be written in prose or verse.
shakespeare wrote plays in iambic pentameter as does mike bartlett in his play king charles iii (2014).playwrights also adapt or re-write other works  such as plays written earlier or literary works originally in another genre. famous playwrights such as henrik ibsen or anton chekhov have had their works adapted many times. the plays of early greek playwrights sophocles  euripides  and aeschylus are still performed. adaptations of a playwright s work may be faithful to the original or creatively interpreted. if the writers  purpose in re-writing the play is to produce a film  they will have to prepare a screenplay. shakespeare s plays  for example  while still regularly performed in the original form  are often adapted and abridged  especially for the cinema. an example of a creative modern adaptation of a play that nonetheless used the original writer s words  is baz luhrmann s version of romeo and juliet. the amendment of the name to romeo + juliet indicates to the audience that the version will be different from the original. tom stoppard s play rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead is a play inspired by shakespeare s hamlet that takes two of shakespeare s most minor characters and creates a new play in which they are the protagonists.  player  it s what the actors do best. they have to exploit whatever talent is given to them  and their talent is dying. they can die heroically  comically  ironically  slowly  suddenly  disgustingly  charmingly or from a great height.tom stoppard  rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead (act two)   ==== screenwriter ====  screenwriters write a screenplay – or script – that provides the words for media productions such as films  television programs and video games. screenwriters may start their careers by writing the screenplay speculatively  that is  they write a script with no advance payment  solicitation or contract. on the other hand  they may be employed or commissioned to adapt the work of a playwright or novelist or other writer. self-employed writers who are paid by contract to write are known as freelancers and screenwriters often work under this type of arrangement. screenwriters  playwrights and other writers are inspired by the great themes and often use similar and familiar plot devices to explore them. for example  in shakespeare s hamlet is a  play within a play  which the hero uses to demonstrate the king s guilt. hamlet gains the co-operation of the actors to set up the play as a thing  wherein i ll catch the conscience of the king . teleplay writer joe menosky deploys the same  play within a play  device in an episode of the science fiction television series star trek  voyager. the bronze-age playwright/hero enlists the support of a star trek crew member to create a play that will convince the ruler (or  patron  as he is called)  of the futility of war.  
==== speechwriter ====  a speechwriter prepares the text for a speech to be given before a group or crowd on a specific occasion and for a specific purpose. they are often intended to be persuasive or inspiring  such as the speeches given by skilled orators like cicero  charismatic or influential political leaders like nelson mandela  or for use in a court of law or parliament. the writer of the speech may be the person intended to deliver it  or it might be prepared by a person hired for the task on behalf of someone else. such is the case when speechwriters are employed by many senior-level elected officials and executives in both government and private sectors.   === interpretive and academic ===   ==== biographer ====  biographers write an account of another person s life. richard ellmann (1918–1987)  for example  was an eminent and award-winning biographer whose work focused on the irish writers james joyce  william butler yeats  and oscar wilde. for the wilde biography  he won the 1989 pulitzer prize for biography.   ==== critic ====  critics consider and assess the extent to which a work succeeds in its purpose. the work under consideration may be literary  theatrical  musical  artistic  or architectural. in assessing the success of a work  the critic takes account of why it was done – for example  why a text was written  for whom  in what style  and under what circumstances. after making such an assessment  critics write and publish their evaluation  adding the value of their scholarship and thinking to substantiate any opinion. the theory of criticism is an area of study in itself  a good critic understands and is able to incorporate the theory behind the work they are evaluating into their assessment. some critics are already writers in another genre. for example  they might be novelists or essayists. influential and respected writer/critics include the art critic charles baudelaire (1821–1867) and the literary critic james wood (born 1965)  both of whom have books published containing collections of their criticism. some critics are poor writers and produce only superficial or unsubstantiated work. hence  while anyone can be an uninformed critic  the notable characteristics of a good critic are understanding  insight  and an ability to write well.  we can claim with at least as much accuracy as a well-known writer claims of his little books  that no newspaper would dare print what we have to say. are we going to be very cruel and abusive  then  by no means  on the contrary  we are going to be impartial. we have no friends – that is a great thing – and no enemies.charles baudelaire  introducing his review of the paris salon of 1845   ==== editor ====  an editor prepares literary material for publication. the material may be the editor s own original work but more
commonly  an editor works with the material of one or more other people. there are different types of editor. copy editors format text to a particular style and/or correct errors in grammar and spelling without changing the text substantively. on the other hand  an editor may suggest or undertake significant changes to a text to improve its readability  sense or structure. this latter type of editor can go so far as to excise some parts of the text  add new parts  or restructure the whole. the work of editors of ancient texts or manuscripts or collections of works results in differing editions. for example  there are many editions of shakespeare s plays by notable editors who also contribute original introductions to the resulting publication. editors who work on journals and newspapers have varying levels of responsibility for the text – they may write original material  in particular  editorials  select what is to be included from a range of items on offer  format the material  or check its accuracy.   ==== encyclopaedist ====  encyclopaedists create organised bodies of knowledge. denis diderot (1713–1784) is renowned for his contributions to the encyclopédie. the encyclopaedist bernardino de sahagún (1499–1590) was a franciscan whose historia general de las cosas de nueva españa is a vast encyclopedia of mesoamerican civilization  commonly referred to as the florentine codex  after the italian manuscript library which holds the best preserved copy.   ==== essayist ====  essayists write essays  which are original pieces of writing of moderate length in which the author makes a case in support of an opinion. they are usually in prose  but some writers have used poetry to present their argument.   ==== historian ====  a historian is a person who studies and writes about the past and is regarded as an authority on it. the purpose of a historian is to employ historical analysis to create coherent narratives that explain  what happened  and  why or how it happened . professional historians typically work in colleges and universities  archival centers  government agencies  museums  and as freelance writers and consultants. edward gibbon s six volume history of the decline and fall of the roman empire influenced the development of historiography.   ==== lexicographer ====  writers who create dictionaries are called lexicographers. one of the most famous is samuel johnson (1709–1784)  whose dictionary of the english language was regarded not only as a great personal scholarly achievement but was also dictionary of such pre-eminence  that would have been referred to by such writers as jane austen.   ==== researcher/scholar ====  researchers and scholars who write about their discoveries and ideas sometimes have profound effects on society. scientists and philosophers are good examples because their new ideas can revolutionise the way people think and how they behave. three of the best known examples of such a revolutionary effect are nicolaus copernicus  who wrote de revolutionibus orbium
coelestium (1543)  charles darwin  who wrote on the origin of species (1859)  and sigmund freud  who wrote the interpretation of dreams (1899). these three highly influential  and initially very controversial  works changed the way people understood their place in the world. copernicus s heliocentric view of the cosmos displaced humans from their previously accepted place at the centre of the universe  darwin s evolutionary theory placed humans firmly within  as opposed to above  the order of nature  and freud s ideas about the power of the unconscious mind overcame the belief that humans were consciously in control of all their own actions.   ==== translator ====  translators have the task of finding some equivalence in another language to a writer s meaning  intention and style. translators whose work has had very significant cultural effect include al-ḥajjāj ibn yūsuf ibn maṭar  who translated elements from greek into arabic and jean-françois champollion  who deciphered egyptian hieroglyphs with the result that he could publish the first translation of the rosetta stone hieroglyphs in 1822. difficulties with translation are exacerbated when words or phrases incorporate rhymes  rhythms  or puns  or when they have connotations in one language that are non-existent in another. for example  the title of le grand meaulnes by alain-fournier is supposedly untranslatable because  no english adjective will convey all the shades of meaning that can be read into the simple [french] word  grand  which takes on overtones as the story progresses.  translators have also become a part of events where political figures who speak different languages meet to look into the relations between countries or solve political conflicts. it is highly critical for the translator to deliver the right information as a drastic impact could be caused if any error occurred.  even if translation is impossible – we have no choice but to do it  to take the next step and start translating. ... the translator s task is to make us either forget or else enjoy the difference.robert dessaix  translator  author   === reportage ===   ==== blogger ====  writers of blogs  which have appeared on the world wide web since the 1990s  need no authorisation to be published. the contents of these short opinion pieces or  posts  form a commentary on issues of specific interest to readers who can use the same technology to interact with the author  with an immediacy hitherto impossible. the ability to link to other sites means that some blog writers – and their writing – may become suddenly and unpredictably popular. malala yousafzai  a young pakistani education activist  rose to prominence because of her blog for bbc. a blog writer is using the technology to create a message that is in some ways like a newsletter and in other ways  like a personal letter.   the greatest difference between a blog and a photocopied school newsletter 
or an annual family letter photocopied and mailed to a hundred friends  is the potential audience and the increased potential for direct communication between audience members . thus  as with other forms of letter  the writer knows some of the readers  but one of the main differences is that  some of the audience will be random  and  that presumably changes the way we [writers] write.  it has been argued that blogs owe a debt to renaissance essayist michel de montaigne  whose essais ( attempts )  were published in 1580  because montaigne  wrote as if he were chatting to his readers  just two friends  whiling away an afternoon in conversation .   ==== columnist ====  columnists write regular pieces for newspapers and other periodicals  usually containing a lively and entertaining expression of opinion. some columnists have had collections of their best work published as a collection in a book  so that readers can re-read what would otherwise be no longer available. columns are quite short pieces of writing so columnists often write in other genres as well. an example is the columnist elizabeth farrelly  who besides being a columnist  is also an architecture critic and author of books.   ==== diarist ====  writers who record their experiences  thoughts or feelings in a sequential form over a period of time in a diary are known as diarists. their writings can provide valuable insights into historical periods  specific events or individual personalities. examples include samuel pepys (1633–1703)  an english administrator and member of parliament  whose detailed private diary provides eyewitness accounts of events during the 17th century  most notably of the great fire of london. anne frank (1929–1945) was a 13-year-old girl whose diary from 1942 to 1944 records both her experiences as a persecuted jew in world war ii and an adolescent dealing with intra-family relationships.   ==== journalist ====  journalists write reports about current events after investigating them and gathering information. some journalists write reports about predictable or scheduled events such as social or political meetings. others are investigative journalists who need to undertake considerable research and analysis in order to write an explanation or account of something complex that was hitherto unknown or not understood. often investigative journalists are reporting criminal or corrupt activity which puts them at risk personally and means that what it is likely that attempts may be made to attack or suppress what they write. an example is bob woodward  a journalist who investigated and wrote about criminal activities by the us president.  journalism ... is a public trust  a responsibility  to report the facts with context and completeness  to speak truth to power  to hold the feet of politicians and officials to the fire of exposure  to discomfort the comfortable  to comfort those who suffer.geoffrey barker  journalist.   ==== memoirist ====  writers of memoirs produce accounts from
the memories of their own lives  which are deemed unusual  important  or scandalous enough to be of interest to general readers. although intended to be factual  readers are alerted to the likelihood of some inaccuracies or bias towards an idiosyncratic perception by the choice of genre. a memoir  for example  is allowed to have a much more selective set of experiences than an autobiography which is expected to be more complete and make a greater attempt at balance. famous memoirists include frances vane  viscountess vane  and giacomo casanova.   === utilitarian ===   ==== ghostwriter ====  ghostwriters write for  or in the style of  someone else so the credit goes to the person on whose behalf the writing is done.   ==== letter writer ====  writers of letters use a reliable form of transmission of messages between individuals  and surviving sets of letters provide insight into the motivations  cultural contexts  and events in the lives of their writers. peter abelard (1079–1142)  philosopher  logician  and theologian is known not only for the heresy contained in some of his work  and the punishment of having to burn his own book  but also for the letters he wrote to héloïse d argenteuil (1090 –1164).the letters (or epistles) of paul the apostle were so influential that over the 2000 years of christian history  paul became  second only to jesus in influence and the amount of discussion and interpretation generated .   ==== report writer ====  report writers are people who gather information  organise and document it so that it can be presented to some person or authority in a position to use it as the basis of a decision. well-written reports influence policies as well as decisions. for example  florence nightingale (1820–1910) wrote reports that were intended to effect administrative reform in matters concerning health in the army. she documented her experience in the crimean war and showed her determination to see improvements   ...after six months of incredible industry she had put together and written with her own hand her notes affecting the health  efficiency and hospital administration of the british army. this extraordinary composition  filling more than eight hundred closely printed pages  laying down vast principles of far-reaching reform  discussing the minutest detail of a multitude of controversial subjects  containing an enormous mass of information of the most varied kinds – military  statistical  sanitary  architectural  became for a long time  the  leading authority on the medical administration of armies .the logs and reports of master mariner william bligh contributed to his being honourably acquitted at the court-martial inquiring into the loss of hms bounty.   ==== scribe ====  a scribe writes ideas and information on behalf of another  sometimes copying from another document  sometimes from oral instruction on behalf of an illiterate person  sometimes transcribing from another medium
such as a tape recording  shorthand  or personal notes. being able to write was a rare achievement for over 500 years in western europe so monks who copied texts were scribes responsible for saving many texts from classical times. the monasteries  where monks who knew how to read and write lived  provided an environment stable enough for writing. irish monks  for example  came to europe in about 600 and  found manuscripts in places like tours and toulouse  which they copied. the monastic writers also illustrated their books with highly skilled art work using gold and rare colours.   ==== technical writer ====  a technical writer prepares instructions or manuals  such as user guides or owner s manuals for users of equipment to follow. technical writers also write various procedures for business  professional or domestic use. since the purpose of technical writing is practical rather than creative  its most important quality is clarity. the technical writer  unlike the creative writer  is required to adhere to the relevant style guide.   == process and methods ==   === writing process ===  there is a range of approaches that writers take to the task of writing. each writer needs to find their own process and most describe it as more or less a struggle. sometimes writers have had the bad fortune to lose their work and have had to start again. before the invention of photocopiers and electronic text storage  a writer s work had to be stored on paper  which meant it was very susceptible to fire in particular. (in very early times  writers used vellum and clay which were more robust materials.) writers whose work was destroyed before completion include l. l. zamenhof  the inventor of esperanto  whose years of work were thrown into the fire by his father because he was afraid that  his son would be thought a spy working code . essayist and historian thomas carlyle  lost the only copy of a manuscript for the french revolution  a history when it was mistakenly thrown into the fire by a maid. he wrote it again from the beginning. writers usually develop a personal schedule. angus wilson  for example  wrote for a number of hours every morning.writer s block is a relatively common experience among writers  especially professional writers  when for a period of time the writer feels unable to write for reasons other than lack of skill or commitment.  happy are they who don t doubt themselves and whose pens fly across the pagegustave flaubert writing to louise colet   ==== sole ==== most writers write alone – typically they are engaged in a solitary activity that requires them to struggle with both the concepts they are trying to express and the best way to express it. this may mean choosing the best genre or genres as well as choosing the best words. writers often develop idiosyncratic solutions to
the problem of finding the right words to put on a blank page or screen.  didn t somerset maugham also write facing a blank wall  ... goethe couldn t write a line if there was another person anywhere in the same house  or so he said at some point.    ==== collaborative ==== collaborative writing means that multiple authors write and contribute to a piece of writing. in this approach  it is highly likely the writers will collaborate on editing the piece too. the more usual process is that the editing is done by an independent editor after the writer submits a draft version. in some cases  such as that between a librettist and composer  a writer will collaborate with another artist on a creative work. one of the best known of these types of collaborations is that between gilbert and sullivan. librettist w. s. gilbert wrote the words for the comic operas created by the partnership.   ==== committee ==== occasionally  a writing task is given to a committee of writers. the most famous example is the task of translating the bible into english  sponsored by king james vi of england in 1604 and accomplished by six committees  some in cambridge and some in oxford  who were allocated different sections of the text. the resulting authorized king james version  published in 1611  has been described as an  everlasting miracle  because its writers (that is  its translators) sought to  hold themselves consciously poised between the claims of accessibility and beauty  plainness and richness  simplicity and majesty  the people and the king  with the result that the language communicates itself  in a way which is quite unaffected  neither literary nor academic  not historical  nor reconstructionist  but transmitting a nearly incredible immediacy from one end of human civilisation to another.    ==== multimedia ====  some writers support the verbal part of their work with images or graphics that are an integral part of the way their ideas are communicated. william blake is one of rare poets who created his own paintings and drawings as integral parts of works such as his songs of innocence and of experience. cartoonists are writers whose work depends heavily on hand drawn imagery. other writers  especially writers for children  incorporate painting or drawing in more or less sophisticated ways. shaun tan  for example  is a writer who uses imagery extensively  sometimes combining fact  fiction and illustration  sometimes for a didactic purpose  sometimes on commission. children s writers beatrix potter  may gibbs  and theodor seuss geisel are as well known for their illustrations as for their texts.   ==== crowd sourced ====  some writers contribute very small sections to a piece of writing that cumulates as a result. this method is particularly suited to very large works  such as dictionaries and encyclopaedias. the best known example
of the former is the oxford english dictionary  under the editorship of lexicographer james murray  who was provided with the prolific and helpful contributions of w.c. minor  at the time an inmate of a hospital for the criminally insane.the best known example of the latter – an encyclopaedia that is crowdsourced – is wikipedia  which relies on millions of writers and editors such as simon pulsifer worldwide.   === motivations === writers have many different reasons for writing  among which is usually some combination of self-expression and recording facts  history or research results. the many physician writers  for example  have combined their observation and knowledge of the human condition with their desire to write and contributed many poems  plays  translations  essays and other texts. some writers write extensively on their motivation and on the likely motivations of other writers. for example  george orwell s essay  why i write  (1946) takes this as its subject. as to  what constitutes success or failure to a writer  it has been described as  a complicated business  where the material rubs up against the spiritual  and psychology plays a big part . the moral i draw is that the writer should seek his reward in the pleasure of his work and in release from the burden of this thoughts  and  indifferent to aught else  care nothing for praise or censure  failure or success.w. somerset maugham in the moon and sixpence (1919)   ==== command ==== some writers are the authors of specific military orders whose clarity will determine the outcome of a battle. among the most controversial and unsuccessful was lord raglan s order at the charge of the light brigade  which being vague and misinterpreted  led to defeat with many casualties.   ==== develop skill/explore ideas ==== some writers use the writing task to develop their own skill (in writing itself or in another area of knowledge) or explore an idea while they are producing a piece of writing. philologist j. r. r. tolkien  for example  created a new language for his fantasy books.  for me the private act of poetry writing is songwriting  confessional  diary-keeping  speculation  problem-solving  storytelling  therapy  anger management  craftsmanship  relaxation  concentration and spiritual adventure all in one inexpensive package.stephen fry  author  poet  playwright  screenwriter  journalist   ==== entertain ==== some genres are a particularly appropriate choice for writers whose chief purpose is to entertain. among them are limericks  many comics and thrillers. writers of children s literature seek to entertain children but are also usually mindful of the educative function of their work as well.   ==== influence ====  anger has motivated many writers  including martin luther  angry at religious corruption  who wrote the ninety-five theses in 1517  to reform the church  and émile zola (1840–1902) who
wrote the public letter  j accuse in 1898 to bring public attention to government injustice  as a consequence of which he had to flee to england from his native france. such writers have affected ideas  opinion or policy significantly.   ==== payment ====  writers may write a particular piece for payment (even if at other times  they write for another reason)  such as when they are commissioned to create a new work  transcribe an old one  translate another writer s work  or write for someone who is illiterate or inarticulate. in some cases  writing has been the only way an individual could earn an income. frances trollope is an example of women who wrote to save herself and her family from penury  at a time when there were very few socially acceptable employment opportunities for them. her book about her experiences in america  called domestic manners of the americans became a great success   even though she was over fifty and had never written before in her life  after which  she continued to write hard  carrying this on almost entirely before breakfast . according to her writer son anthony trollope  her books saved the family from ruin . i write for two reasons  partly to make money and partly to win the respect of people whom i respect.e. m. forster  novelist  essayist  librettist   ==== teach ==== aristotle  who was tutor to alexander the great  wrote to support his teaching. he wrote two treatises for the young prince   on monarchy  and  on colonies  and his dialogues also appear to have been written either  as lecture notes or discussion papers for use in his philosophy school at the athens lyceum between 334 and 323 bc.  they encompass both his  scientific  writings (metaphysics  physics  biology  meteorology  and astronomy  as well as logic and argument) the  non-scientific  works (poetry  oratory  ethics  and politics)  and  major elements in traditional greek and roman education .writers of textbooks also use writing to teach and there are numerous instructional guides to writing itself. for example  many people will find it necessary to make a speech  in the service of your company  church  civic club  political party  or other organization  and so  instructional writers have produced texts and guides for speechmaking.   ==== tell a story ==== many writers use their skill to tell the story of their people  community or cultural tradition  especially one with a personal significance. examples include shmuel yosef agnon  miguel ángel asturias  doris lessing  toni morrison  isaac bashevis singer  and patrick white. writers such as mario vargas llosa  herta müller  and erich maria remarque write about the effect of conflict  dispossession and war.   ==== woo a lover ====
writers use prose  poetry  and letters as part of courtship rituals.  edmond rostand s play cyrano de bergerac  written in verse  is about both the power of love and the power of the self-doubting writer/hero s writing talent.   == authorship ==   === pen names === writers sometimes use a pseudonym  otherwise known as a pen name or  nom de plume . the reasons they do this include to separate their writing from other work (or other types of writing) for which they are known  to enhance the possibility of publication by reducing prejudice (such as against women writers or writers of a particular ethnicity)  to reduce personal risk (such as political risks from individuals  groups or states that disagree with them)  or to make their name better suit another language. examples of well-known writers who used a pen name include  george eliot (1819–1880)  whose real name was mary anne (or marian) evans  george orwell (1903–1950)  whose real name was eric blair  george sand (1804–1876)  whose real name was lucile aurore dupin  dr. seuss (1904–1991)  whose real name was theodor seuss geisel  stendhal (1783–1842)  whose real name was marie-henri beyle and mark twain (1835–1910)  whose real name was samuel langhorne clemens. apart from the large numbers of works attributable only to  anonymous  there are a large number of writers who were once known and are now unknown. efforts are made to find and re-publish these writers  works. one example is the publication of books like japan as seen and described by famous writers (a 2010 reproduction of a pre-1923 publication) by  anonymous . another example is the founding of a library and study centre for the study of early english women s writing in chawton  england.   === fictional writers === some fictional writers are very well known because of the strength of their characterization by the real writer or the significance of their role as writer in the plot of a work. examples of this type of fictional writer include edward casaubon  a fictional scholar in george eliot s middlemarch  and edwin reardon  a fictional writer in george gissing s new grub street. casaubon s efforts to complete an authoritative study affect the decisions taken by the protagonists in eliot s novel and drive significant parts of the plot. in gissing s work  reardon s efforts to produce high quality writing put him in conflict with another character  who takes a more commercial approach. robinson crusoe is a fictional writer who was originally credited by the real writer (daniel defoe) as being the author of the confessional letters in the work of the same name. bridget jones is a comparable fictional diarist created by writer helen fielding. both works became famous and popular  their protagonists and story were developed further through many adaptations  including film versions. cyrano de bergerac was a real writer
who created a fictional character with his own name. the sibylline books  a collection of prophecies were supposed to have been purchased from the cumaean sibyl by the last king of rome. since they were consulted during periods of crisis  it could be said that they are a case of real works created by a fictional writer.   === writers of sacred texts ===  religious texts or scriptures are the texts which various religious traditions consider to be sacred  or of central importance to their religious tradition. some religions and spiritual movements believe that their sacred texts are divinely or supernaturally revealed or inspired  while others have individual authors.   == controversial writing ==  skilled writers influence ideas and society  so there are many instances where a writer s work or opinion has been unwelcome and controversial. in some cases  they have been persecuted or punished. aware that their writing will cause controversy or put themselves and others into danger  some writers self-censor  or withhold their work from publication  or hide their manuscripts  or use some other technique to preserve and protect their work. two of the most famous examples are leonardo da vinci and charles darwin. leonardo  had the habit of conversing with himself in his writings and of putting his thoughts into the clearest and most simple form . he used  left-handed or mirror writing  (a technique described as  so characteristic of him ) to protect his scientific research from other readers. the fear of persecution  social disgrace  and being proved incorrect are regarded as contributing factors to darwin s delaying the publication of his radical and influential work on the origin of species. one of the results of controversies caused by a writer s work is scandal  which is a negative public reaction that causes damage to reputation and depends on public outrage. it has been said that it is possible to scandalise the public because the public  wants to be shocked in order to confirm its own sense of virtue . the scandal may be caused by what the writer wrote or by the style in which it was written. in either case  the content or the style is likely to have broken with tradition or expectation. making such a departure may in fact  be part of the writer s intention or at least  part of the result of introducing innovations into the genre in which they are working. for example  novelist d h lawrence challenged ideas of what was acceptable as well as what was expected in form. these may be regarded as literary scandals  just as  in a different way  are the scandals involving writers who mislead the public about their identity  such as norma khouri or helen darville who  in deceiving the public  are considered to have committed fraud. writers may also cause the more usual type of scandal – whereby the public
is outraged by the opinions  behaviour or life of the individual (an experience not limited to writers). poet paul verlaine outraged society with his behaviour and treatment of his wife and child as well as his lover. among the many writers whose writing or life was affected by scandals are oscar wilde  lord byron  jean-paul sartre  albert camus  and h. g. wells. one of the most famously scandalous writers was the marquis de sade who offended the public both by his writings and by his behaviour.   === punishment ===  the consequence of scandal for a writer may be censorship or discrediting of the work  or social ostracism of its creator. in some instances  punishment  persecution  or prison follow. the list of journalists killed in europe  list of journalists killed in the united states and the list of journalists killed in russia are examples. others include   the balibo five  a group of australian television journalists who were killed while attempting to report on indonesian incursions into portuguese timor in 1975. dietrich bonhoeffer (1906–1945)  an influential theologian who wrote the cost of discipleship and was hanged for his resistance to nazism. antonio gramsci (1891–1937)  who wrote political theory and criticism and was imprisoned for this by the italian fascist regime. günter grass (1927–2015)  whose poem  what must be said  led to his being declared persona non grata  in israel. peter greste (born 1965)  a journalist who was imprisoned in egypt for news reporting which was  damaging to national security.  primo levi (1919–1987) who  among many jews imprisoned during world war ii  wrote an account of his incarceration called if this is a man. galileo galilei (1564–1642)  who was sentenced to imprisonment for heresy as a consequence of writing in support of the then controversial theory of heliocentrism  although the sentence was almost immediately commuted to house arrest. sima qian (145 or 135 bc – 86 bc) who  successfully defended a vilified master from defamatory charges  and was given  the choice between castration or execution.  he  became a eunuch and had to bury his own book ... in order to protect it from the authorities.  salman rushdie (born 1947)  whose novel the satanic verses was banned and burned internationally after causing such a worldwide storm that a fatwā was issued against him. though rushdie survived  numerous others were killed in incidents connected to the novel. roberto saviano (born 1979)  whose best-selling book gomorrah provoked the neapolitan camorra  annoyed silvio berlusconi and led to him receiving permanent police protection. aleksandr solzhenitsyn (1918–2008)  who used his experience of imprisonment as the subject of his writing in one day in the life of ivan denisovich and cancer ward—the latter  while legally published in the soviet union  had to gain the approval of the ussr union of writers. william tyndale (c. 1494 – 1536)  who was executed
because he translated the bible into english. simon sheppard (born 1957) who was imprisoned in the uk for expressing controversial opinions on race and the holocaust.   == protection and representation == the organisation reporters without borders (also known by its french name  reporters sans frontières) was set up to help protect writers and advocate on their behalf. the professional and industrial interests of writers are represented by various national or regional guilds or unions. examples include writers guilds in australia and great britain and unions in arabia  armenia  azerbaijan  canada  estonia  hungary  ireland  moldova  philippines  poland  québéc  romania  russia  sudan  and ukraine. in the united states  there is both a writers guild and a national writers union.   == awards ==  there are many awards for writers whose writing has been adjudged excellent. among them are the many literary awards given by individual countries  such as the prix goncourt and the pulitzer prize  as well as international awards such as the nobel prize in literature. russian writer boris pasternak (1890–1960)  under pressure from his government  reluctantly declined the nobel prize that he won in 1958.   == see also ==   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to writers at wikimedia commons texts on wikisource letters of abélard and héloïse luther s ninety-five theses hamlet gulliver s travels a modest proposal the battle of the books songs of innocence songs of experience the history of the decline and fall of the roman empire poems j accuse...  author e. m. forster
an essay is  generally  a piece of writing that gives the author s own argument — but the definition is vague  overlapping with those of a paper  an article  a pamphlet  and a short story. essays have traditionally been sub-classified as formal and informal. formal essays are characterized by  serious purpose  dignity  logical organization  length  whereas the informal essay is characterized by  the personal element (self-revelation  individual tastes and experiences  confidential manner)  humor  graceful style  rambling structure  unconventionality or novelty of theme  etc.essays are commonly used as literary criticism  political manifestos  learned arguments  observations of daily life  recollections  and reflections of the author. almost all modern essays are written in prose  but works in verse have been dubbed essays (e.g.  alexander pope s an essay on criticism and an essay on man). while brevity usually defines an essay  voluminous works like john locke s an essay concerning human understanding and thomas malthus s an essay on the principle of population are counterexamples. in some countries (e.g.  the united states and canada)  essays have become a major part of formal education. secondary students are taught structured essay formats to improve their writing skills  admission essays are often used by universities in selecting applicants  and in the humanities and social sciences essays are often used as a way of assessing the performance of students during final exams. the concept of an  essay  has been extended to other media beyond writing. a film essay is a movie that often incorporates documentary filmmaking styles and focuses more on the evolution of a theme or idea. a photographic essay covers a topic with a linked series of photographs that may have accompanying text or captions.   == definitions ==  an essay has been defined in a variety of ways. one definition is a  prose composition with a focused subject of discussion  or a  long  systematic discourse . it is difficult to define the genre into which essays fall. aldous huxley  a leading essayist  gives guidance on the subject. he notes that  the essay is a literary device for saying almost everything about almost anything  and adds that  by tradition  almost by definition  the essay is a short piece . furthermore  huxley argues that  essays belong to a literary species whose extreme variability can be studied most effectively within a three-poled frame of reference . these three poles (or worlds in which the essay may exist) are   the personal and the autobiographical  the essayists that feel most comfortable in this pole  write fragments of reflective autobiography and look at the world through the keyhole of anecdote and description . the objective  the factual  and the concrete particular  the essayists that write from this pole  do not speak directly of themselves  but
turn their attention outward to some literary or scientific or political theme. their art consists of setting forth  passing judgment upon  and drawing general conclusions from the relevant data . the abstract-universal  in this pole  we find those essayists who do their work in the world of high abstractions  who are never personal and who seldom mention the particular facts of experience.huxley adds that the most satisfying essays  ...make the best not of one  not of two  but of all the three worlds in which it is possible for the essay to exist.  the word essay derives from the french infinitive essayer   to try  or  to attempt .  in english essay first meant  a trial  or  an attempt  and this is still an alternative meaning.  the frenchman michel de montaigne (1533–1592) was the first author to describe his work as essays  he used the term to characterize these as  attempts  to put his thoughts into writing  and his essays grew out of his commonplacing.  inspired in particular by the works of plutarch  a translation of whose œuvres morales (moral works) into french had just been published by jacques amyot  montaigne began to compose his essays in 1572  the first edition  entitled essais  was published in two volumes in 1580.  for the rest of his life  he continued revising previously published essays and composing new ones. francis bacon s essays  published in book form in 1597  1612  and 1625  were the first works in english that described themselves as essays. ben jonson first used the word essayist in english in 1609  according to the oxford english dictionary.   == history ==   === europe === english essayists included robert burton (1577–1641) and sir thomas browne (1605–1682). in france  michel de montaigne s three volume essais in the mid 1500s contain over 100 examples widely regarded as the predecessor of the modern essay. in italy  baldassare castiglione wrote about courtly manners in his essay il cortigiano. in the 17th century  the jesuit baltasar gracián wrote about the theme of wisdom. during the age of enlightenment  essays were a favored tool of polemicists who aimed at convincing readers of their position  they also featured heavily in the rise of periodical literature  as seen in the works of joseph addison  richard steele and samuel johnson. in the 18th and 19th centuries  edmund burke and samuel taylor coleridge wrote essays for the general public. the early 19th century  in particular  saw a proliferation of great essayists in english – william hazlitt  charles lamb  leigh hunt and thomas de quincey all penned numerous essays on diverse subjects. in the 20th century  a number of essayists tried to explain the new movements in art and culture by using essays (e.g.  t.s. eliot). virginia woolf  edmund wilson
 and charles du bos wrote literary criticism essays.   === japan ===  as with the novel  essays existed in japan several centuries before they developed in europe with a genre of essays known as zuihitsu — loosely connected essays and fragmented ideas. zuihitsu have existed since almost the beginnings of japanese literature. many of the most noted early works of japanese literature are in this genre. notable examples include the pillow book (c. 1000)  by court lady sei shōnagon  and tsurezuregusa (1330)  by particularly renowned japanese buddhist monk yoshida kenkō. kenkō described his short writings similarly to montaigne  referring to them as  nonsensical thoughts  written in  idle hours . another noteworthy difference from europe is that women have traditionally written in japan  though the more formal  chinese-influenced writings of male writers were more prized at the time.   == forms and styles == this section describes the different forms and styles of essay writing. these forms and styles are used by an array of authors  including university students and professional essayists.   === cause and effect === the defining features of a  cause and effect  essay are causal chains that connect from a cause to an effect  careful language  and chronological or emphatic order. a writer using this rhetorical method must consider the subject  determine the purpose  consider the audience  think critically about different causes or consequences  consider a thesis statement  arrange the parts  consider the language  and decide on a conclusion.   === classification and division === classification is the categorization of objects into a larger whole while division is the breaking of a larger whole into smaller parts.   === compare and contrast === compare and contrast essays are characterized by a basis for comparison  points of comparison  and analogies. it is grouped by the object (chunking) or by point (sequential). the comparison highlights the similarities between two or more similar objects while contrasting highlights the differences between two or more objects. when writing a compare/contrast essay  writers need to determine their purpose  consider their audience  consider the basis and points of comparison  consider their thesis statement  arrange and develop the comparison  and reach a conclusion. compare and contrast is arranged emphatically.   === expository === expository essay is used to inform  describe or explain a topic  using important facts and teaching reader about the topic. mostly written in third-person  using  it   he   she   they . expository essay uses formal language to discuss someone or something. examples of expository essays are  a medical or biological condition  social or technological process  life or character of a famous person. writing of expository essay often consists of following next steps  organizing thoughts (brainstorming)  researching a topic  developing a thesis statement  writing the introduction  writing the body of
essay  writing the conclusion. expository essays are often assigned as a part of sat and other standardized testings or as a homework for high school and college students.   === descriptive === descriptive writing is characterized by sensory details  which appeal to the physical senses  and details that appeal to a reader s emotional  physical  or intellectual sensibilities. determining the purpose  considering the audience  creating a dominant impression  using descriptive language  and organizing the description are the rhetorical choices to consider when using a description. a description is usually arranged spatially but can also be chronological or emphatic. the focus of a description is the scene. description uses tools such as denotative language  connotative language  figurative language  metaphor  and simile to arrive at a dominant impression. one university essay guide states that  descriptive writing says what happened or what another author has discussed  it provides an account of the topic .lyric essays are an important form of descriptive essays.   === dialectic === in the dialectic form of the essay  which is commonly used in philosophy  the writer makes a thesis and argument  then objects to their own argument (with a counterargument)  but then counters the counterargument with a final and novel argument. this form benefits from presenting a broader perspective while countering a possible flaw that some may present. this type is sometimes called an ethics paper.   === exemplification === an exemplification essay is characterized by a generalization and relevant  representative  and believable examples including anecdotes. writers need to consider their subject  determine their purpose  consider their audience  decide on specific examples  and arrange all the parts together when writing an exemplification essay.   === familiar === an essayist writes a familiar essay if speaking to a single reader  writing about both themselves  and about particular subjects. anne fadiman notes that  the genre s heyday was the early nineteenth century  and that its greatest exponent was charles lamb.  she also suggests that while critical essays have more brain than the heart  and personal essays have more heart than brain  familiar essays have equal measures of both.   === history (thesis) === a history essay sometimes referred to as a thesis essay describes an argument or claim about one or more historical events and supports that claim with evidence  arguments  and references. the text makes it clear to the reader why the argument or claim is as such.   === narrative === a narrative uses tools such as flashbacks  flash-forwards  and transitions that often build to a climax. the focus of a narrative is the plot. when creating a narrative  authors must determine their purpose  consider their audience  establish their point of view  use dialogue  and organize the narrative. a narrative is usually arranged chronologically.   === argumentative === an argumentative essay is
a critical  piece of writing  aimed at presenting objective analysis of the subject matter  narrowed down to a single topic. the main idea of all the criticism is to provide an opinion either of positive or negative implication. as such  a critical essay requires research and analysis  strong internal logic and sharp structure. its structure normally builds around introduction with a topic s relevance and a thesis statement  body paragraphs with arguments linking back to the main thesis  and conclusion. in addition  an argumentative essay may include a refutation section where conflicting ideas are acknowledged  described  and criticized. each argument of argumentative essay should be supported with sufficient evidence  relevant to the point.   === process === a process essay is used for an explanation of making or breaking something. often  it is written in chronological order or numerical order to show step-by-step processes. it has all the qualities of a technical document with the only difference is that it is often written in descriptive mood  while a technical document is mostly in imperative mood.   === economic === an economic essay can start with a thesis  or it can start with a theme. it can take a narrative course and a descriptive course. it can even become an argumentative essay if the author feels the need. after the introduction  the author has to do his/her best to expose the economic matter at hand  to analyze it  evaluate it  and draw a conclusion. if the essay takes more of a narrative form then the author has to expose each aspect of the economic puzzle in a way that makes it clear and understandable for the reader   === reflective === a reflective essay is an analytical piece of writing in which the writer describes a real or imaginary scene  event  interaction  passing thought  memory  or form — adding a personal reflection on the meaning of the topic in the author s life. thus  the focus is not merely descriptive. the writer doesn t just describe the situation   but revisits the scene with more detail and emotion to examine what went well  or reveal a need for additional learning — and may relate what transpired to the rest of the author s life.   === other logical structures === the logical progression and organizational structure of an essay can take many forms. understanding how the movement of thought is managed through an essay has a profound impact on its overall cogency and ability to impress. a number of alternative logical structures for essays have been visualized as diagrams  making them easy to implement or adapt in the construction of an argument.   == academic ==  in countries like the united states and the united kingdom  essays have become a major part of a formal education in the form of free response questions. secondary students in these countries are
taught structured essay formats to improve their writing skills  and essays are often used by universities in these countries in selecting applicants (see admissions essay). in both secondary and tertiary education  essays are used to judge the mastery and comprehension of the material. students are asked to explain  comment on  or assess a topic of study in the form of an essay. in some courses  university students must complete one or more essays over several weeks or months. in addition  in fields such as the humanities and social sciences  mid-term and end of term examinations often require students to write a short essay in two or three hours. in these countries  so-called academic essays also called papers  are usually more formal than literary ones. they may still allow the presentation of the writer s own views  but this is done in a logical and factual manner  with the use of the first person often discouraged. longer academic essays (often with a word limit of between 2 000 and 5 000 words) are often more discursive.  they sometimes begin with a short summary analysis of what has previously been written on a topic  which is often called a literature review.longer essays may also contain an introductory page that defines words and phrases of the essay s topic. most academic institutions require that all substantial facts  quotations  and other supporting material in an essay be referenced in a bibliography or works cited page at the end of the text. this scholarly convention helps others (whether teachers or fellow scholars) to understand the basis of facts and quotations the author uses to support the essay s argument and helps readers evaluate to what extent the argument is supported by evidence  and to evaluate the quality of that evidence. the academic essay tests the student s ability to present their thoughts in an organized way and is designed to test their intellectual capabilities. one of the challenges facing universities is that in some cases  students may submit essays purchased from an essay mill (or  paper mill ) as their own work. an  essay mill  is a ghostwriting service that sells pre-written essays to university and college students. since plagiarism is a form of academic dishonesty or academic fraud  universities and colleges may investigate papers they suspect are from an essay mill by using plagiarism detection software  which compares essays against a database of known mill essays and by orally testing students on the contents of their papers.   == magazine or newspaper ==  essays often appear in magazines  especially magazines with an intellectual bent  such as the atlantic and harpers. magazine and newspaper essays use many of the essay types described in the section on forms and styles (e.g.  descriptive essays  narrative essays  etc.). some newspapers also print essays in the op-ed section.   == employment == employment essays detailing experience in a certain occupational field
are required when applying for some jobs  especially government jobs in the united states. essays known as knowledge skills and executive core qualifications are required when applying to certain us federal government positions. a ksa  or  knowledge  skills  and abilities  is a series of narrative statements that are required when applying to federal government job openings in the united states. ksas are used along with resumes to determine who the best applicants are when several candidates qualify for a job. the knowledge  skills  and abilities necessary for the successful performance of a position are contained on each job vacancy announcement. ksas are brief and focused essays about one s career and educational background that presumably qualify one to perform the duties of the position being applied for. an executive core qualification  or ecq  is a narrative statement that is required when applying to senior executive service positions within the us federal government. like the ksas  ecqs are used along with resumes to determine who the best applicants are when several candidates qualify for a job. the office of personnel management has established five executive core qualifications that all applicants seeking to enter the senior executive service must demonstrate.   == non-literary types ==   === film === a film essay (or  cinematic essay ) consists of the evolution of a theme or an idea rather than a plot per se  or the film literally being a cinematic accompaniment to a narrator reading an essay. from another perspective  an essay film could be defined as a documentary film visual basis combined with a form of commentary that contains elements of self-portrait (rather than autobiography)  where the signature (rather than the life story) of the filmmaker is apparent. the cinematic essay often blends documentary  fiction  and experimental film making using tones and editing styles.the genre is not well-defined but might include propaganda works of early soviet parliamentarians like dziga vertov  present-day filmmakers including chris marker  michael moore (roger & me  bowling for columbine and fahrenheit 9/11)  errol morris (the thin blue line)  morgan spurlock (supersize me) and agnès varda. jean-luc godard describes his recent work as  film-essays . two filmmakers whose work was the antecedent to the cinematic essay include georges méliès and bertolt brecht.  méliès made a short film (the coronation of edward vii (1902)) about the 1902 coronation of king edward vii  which mixes actual footage with shots of a recreation of the event. brecht was a playwright who experimented with film and incorporated film projections into some of his plays. orson welles made an essay film in his own pioneering style  released in 1974  called f for fake  which dealt specifically with art forger elmyr de hory and with the themes of deception   fakery  and authenticity in general.  these are often published online on video hosting services.david winks gray s article  the essay film in action
 states that the  essay film became an identifiable form of filmmaking in the 1950s and  60s . he states that since that time  essay films have tended to be  on the margins  of the filmmaking the world. essay films have a  peculiar searching  questioning tone ... between documentary and fiction  but without  fitting comfortably  into either genre. gray notes that just like written essays  essay films  tend to marry the personal voice of a guiding narrator (often the director) with a wide swath of other voices . the university of wisconsin cinematheque website echoes some of gray s comments  it calls a film essay an  intimate and allusive  genre that  catches filmmakers in a pensive mood  ruminating on the margins between fiction and documentary  in a manner that is  refreshingly inventive  playful  and idiosyncratic .   === music === in the realm of music  composer samuel barber wrote a set of  essays for orchestra  relying on the form and content of the music to guide the listener s ear  rather than any extra-musical plot or story.   === photography ===  a photographic essay strives to cover a topic with a linked series of photographs. photo essays range from purely photographic works to photographs with captions or small notes to full-text essays with a few or many accompanying photographs. photo essays can be sequential in nature  intended to be viewed in a particular order — or they may consist of non-ordered photographs viewed all at once or in an order that the viewer chooses. all photo essays are collections of photographs  but not all collections of photographs are photo essays. photo essays often address a certain issue or attempt to capture the character of places and events.   === visual arts === in the visual arts  an essay is a preliminary drawing or sketch that forms a basis for a final painting or sculpture  made as a test of the work s composition (this meaning of the term  like several of those following  comes from the word essay s meaning of  attempt  or  trial ).   == see also ==   == references ==   == further reading == theodor w. adorno   the essay as form  in  theodor w. adorno  the adorno reader  blackwell publishers 2000. beaujour  michel. miroirs d encre  rhétorique de l autoportrait . paris  seuil  1980. [poetics of the literary self-portrait. trans. yara milos. new york  nyu press  1991]. bensmaïa  reda. the barthes effect  the essay as reflective text. trans. pat fedkiew. minneapolis  univ. of minnesota press  1987. d agata  john (editor)  the lost origins of the essay. st paul  graywolf press  2009. giamatti  louis.  the cinematic essay  in godard and the others  essays
in cinematic form. london  tantivy press  1975. lopate  phillip.  in search of the centaur  the essay-film  in beyond document  essays on nonfiction film. edited by charles warren  wesleyan university press  1998. pp. 243–270. warburton  nigel. the basics of essay writing. routledge  2006. isbn 0-415-24000-x  978-0-415-24000-0   == external links == essay writing category on englishgrammar.org essay etexts at project gutenberg what is an essay  from wikidot the dialectical essay  a detailed writing guide –  sewanee university in praise of the undergraduate essay by dan edelstein  stanford university the age of the essay –  criticism of the modern essay  by paul graham
a novelist is an author or writer of novels  though often novelists also write in other genres of both fiction and non-fiction. some novelists are professional novelists  thus make a living writing novels and other fiction  while others aspire to support themselves in this way or write as an avocation. most novelists struggle to get their debut novel published  but once published they often continue to be published  although very few become literary celebrities  thus gaining prestige or a considerable income from their work. novelists come from a variety of backgrounds and social classes  and frequently this shapes the content of their works. public reception of a novelist s work  the literary criticism commenting on it  and the novelists  incorporation of their own experiences into works and characters can lead to the author s personal life and identity being associated with a novel s fictional content. for this reason  the environment within which a novelist works and the reception of their novels by both the public and publishers can be influenced by their demographics or identity  important among these culturally constructed identities are gender  sexual identity  social class  race or ethnicity  nationality  religion  and an association with place. similarly  some novelists have creative identities derived from their focus on different genres of fiction  such as crime  romance or historical novels. while many novelists compose fiction to satisfy personal desires  novelists and commentators often ascribe a particular social responsibility or role to novel writers. many authors use such moral imperatives to justify different approaches to novel writing  including activism or different approaches to representing reality  truthfully .   == etymology ==  novelist is a term derivative from the term  novel   describing the  writer of novels . the oxford english dictionary recognizes other definitions of novelist  first appearing in the 16th and 17th centuries to refer to either  an innovator (in thought or belief)  someone who introduces something new or who favours novelty  or  an inexperienced person  a novice.  however  the oed attributes the primary contemporary meaning of  a writer of novels  as first appearing in the 1633 book  east-india colation  by c. farewell citing the passage  it beeing a pleasant observation (at a distance) to note the order of their coaches and carriages..as if (presented to a novelist) it had bin the spoyles of a tryumph leading captive  or a preparation to some sad execution   according to the google ngrams  the term novelist first appears in the google books database in 1521.   == process  publication and profession ==  the difference between professional and amateur novelists often is the author s ability to publish. many people take up novel writing as a hobby  but the difficulties of completing large scale fictional works of quality prevent the completion of novels. once authors have
completed a novel  they often will try to get it published. the publishing industry requires novels to have accessible profitable markets  thus many novelists will self-publish to circumvent the editorial control of publishers. self-publishing has long been an option for writers  with vanity presses printing bound books for a fee paid by the writer. in these settings  unlike the more traditional publishing industry  activities usually reserved for a publishing house  like the distribution and promotion of the book  become the author s responsibility. the rise of the internet and electronic books has made self publishing far less expensive and a realistic way for authors to realize income. novelists apply a number of different methods to writing their novels  relying on a variety of approaches to inspire creativity. some communities actively encourage amateurs to practice writing novels to develop these unique practices  that vary from author to author. for example  the internet-based group  national novel writing month  encourages people to write 50 000-word novels in the month of november  to give novelists practice completing such works. in the  2010 event  over 200 000 people took part – writing a total of over 2.8 billion words.   === age and experience ===  novelists don t usually publish their first novels until later in life. however  many novelists begin writing at a young age. for example  iain banks (1954-2013) began writing at eleven  and at sixteen completed his first novel   the hungarian lift-jet  about international arms dealers   in pencil in a larger-than-foolscap log book . however  he was thirty before he published his first novel  the highly controversial the wasp factory in 1984. the success of this novel enabled banks to become a full-time novelist. often an important writers  juvenilia  even if not published  is prized by scholars because it provides insight into an author s biography and approach to writing  for example  the brontë family s juvenilia that depicts their imaginary world of gondal  currently in the british library  has provided important information on their development as writers.occasionally  novelists publish as early as their teens. for example  patrick o brian published his first novel  caesar  the life story of a panda-leopard  at the age of 15  which brought him considerable critical attention. similarly  barbara newhall follett s  the house without windows  was accepted and published in 1927 when she was 13 by the knopf publishing house and earned critical acclaim from the new york times  the saturday review  and h. l. mencken.  occasionally  these works will achieve popular success as well. for example  though christopher paolini s eragon (published at age 15) was not a great critical success  its popularity among readers placed it on the new york times children s books best seller list for 121 weeks.first-time novelists of any age often find themselves
unable to get works published  because of a number of reasons reflecting the inexperience of the author and the economic realities of publishers. often authors must find advocates in the publishing industry  usually literary agents  to successfully publish their debut novels. sometimes new novelists will self-publish  because publishing houses will not risk the capital needed to market books by an unknown author to the public.responding to the difficulty of successfully writing and publishing first novels  especially at a young age  there are a number of awards for young and first time novelists to highlight exceptional works from new and/or young authors (for examples see category literary awards honouring young writers and category first book awards).   === income ===  in contemporary british and american publishing markets  most authors receive only a small monetary advance before publication of their debut novel  in the rare exceptions when a large print run and high volume of sales are anticipated  the advance can be larger. however  once an author has established themselves in print  some authors can make steady income as long as they remain productive as writers. additionally  many novelists  even published ones  will take on outside work  such as teaching creative writing in academic institutions  or leave novel writing as a secondary hobby.  few novelist become literary celebrities or become very wealthy from sale of their novels alone. often those authors who are wealthy and successful will produce extremely popular genre fiction. examples include authors like james patterson  who was the highest paid author in 2010  making 70 million dollars  topping both other novelists and authors of non-fiction. other famous literary millionaires include popular successes like j. k. rowling  author of the harry potter series  dan brown author of the da vinci code  historical novelist bernard cornwell  and twilight author stephenie meyer.   == personal experience ==  the personal experiences of the novelist will often shape what they write and how readers and critics will interpret their novels. literary reception has long relied on practices of reading literature through biographical criticism  in which the author s life is presumed to have influence on the topical and thematic concerns of works. some veins of criticism use this information about the novelist to derive an understanding of the novelist s intentions within his work. however  postmodern literary critics often denounce such an approach  the most notable of these critiques comes from roland barthes who argues in his essay  death of the author  that the author no longer should dictate the reception and meaning derived from their work. other  theoretical approaches to literary criticism attempt to explore the author s unintentional influence over their work  methods like psychoanalytic theory or cultural studies  presume that the work produced by a novelist represents fundamental parts of the author s identity. milan kundera describes the tensions between the novelist s own identity and the
work that the author produces in his essay in the new yorker titled  what is a novelist  he says that the novelist s  honesty is bound to the vile stake of his megalomania [...]the work is not simply everything a novelist writes-notebooks  diaries  articles. it is the end result of long labor on an aesthetic project[...]the novelist is the sole master of his work. he is his work.  the close intimacy of identity with the novelist s work ensures that particular elements  whether for class  gender  sexuality  nationality  race  or place-based identity  will influence the reception of their work.   === socio-economic class ===  historically  because of the amount of leisure time and education required to write novels  most novelists have come from the upper or the educated middle classes. however  working men and women began publishing novels in the twentieth century. this includes in britain walter greenwood s love on the dole (1933)  from america b. traven s  the death ship (1926) and agnes smedley  daughter of earth (1929) and from the soviet union nikolay ostrovsky s how the steel was tempered (1932). later  in 1950s britain  came a group of writers known as the  angry young men  which included the novelists alan sillitoe and kingsley amis  who came from the working class and who wrote about working class culture.some novelists deliberately write for a working class audience for political ends  profiling  the working classes and working-class life  perhaps with the intention of making propaganda . such literature  sometimes called proletarian literature  maybe associated with the political agendas of the communist party or left wing sympathizers  and seen as a  device of revolution . however  the british tradition of working class literature  unlike the russian and american  was not especially inspired by the communist party  but had its roots in the chartist movement  and socialism  amongst others.   === national or place-based identity ===  novelists are often classified by their national affiliation  suggesting that novels take on a particular character based on the national identity of the authors. in some literature  national identity shapes the self-definition of many novelists. for example  in american literature  many novelists set out to create the  great american novel  or a novel that defines the american experience in their time. other novelists engage politically or socially with the identity of other members of their nationality  and thus help define that national identity. for instance  critic nicola minott-ahl describes victor hugo s notre-dame de paris directly helping in the creation of french political and social identity in mid-nineteenth century france.some novelists become intimately linked with a particular place or geographic region and therefore receive a place-based identity. in his discussion of the history of the association of particular novelists with place in british literature  critic d. c.
d. pocock  described the sense of place not developing in that canon until a century after the novel form first solidified at the beginning of the 19th century. often such british regional literature captures the social and local  character of a particular region in britain  focussing on specific features  such as dialect  customs  history  and landscape (also called local colour)   such a locale is likely to be rural and/or provincial.  thomas hardy s (1840-1928) novels can be described as regional because of the way he makes use of these elements in relation to a part of the west of england  that he names wessex. other british writers that have been characterized as regional novelists  are the brontë sisters  and writers like mary webb (1881-1927)  margiad evans (1909–58) and geraint goodwin (1903–42)  who are associate with the welsh border region. george eliot (1801–86) on the other hand is particularly associated with the rural english midlands  whereas arnold bennett (1867–1931) is the novelist of the potteries in staffordshire  or the  five towns  (actually six) that now make-up stoke-on-trent. similarly  novelist and poet walter scott s (1771-1832) contribution in creating a unified identity for scotland and were some of the most popular in all of europe during the subsequent century. scott s novels were influential in recreating a scottish identity that the upper-class british society could embrace.  in american fiction  the concept of american literary regionalism ensures that many genres of novel associated with particular regions often define the reception of the novelists. for example  in writing western novels  zane grey has been described as a  place-defining novelist  credited for defining the western frontier in america consciousness at the beginning of the 20th century while becoming linked as an individual to his depiction of that space.similarly  novelist such as mark twain  william faulkner  eudora welty  and flannery o connor are often describe as writing within a particular tradition of southern literature  in which subject matter relevant to the south is associated with their own identities as authors. for example  william faulkner set many of his short stories and novels in yoknapatawpha county  which is based on  and nearly geographically identical to  lafayette county  of which his hometown of oxford  mississippi. in addition to the geographical component of southern literature  certain themes have appeared because of the similar histories of the southern states in regard to slavery  the american civil war  and reconstruction. the conservative culture in the south has also produced a strong focus by novelists from there on the significance of family  religion  community  the use of the southern dialect  along with a strong sense of place. the south s troubled history with racial issues has also continually concerned its novelists.in latin america a literary movement called criollismo or costumbrismo was active from the end of the 19th century to
the beginning of the 20th century  which is considered equivalent to american literary regionalism. it used a realist style to portray the scenes  language  customs and manners of the country the writer was from  especially the lower and peasant classes  criollismo led to an original literature based on the continent s natural elements  mostly epic and foundational. it was strongly influenced by the wars of independence from spain and also denotes how each country in its own way defines criollo  which in latin america refers to locally-born people of spanish ancestry.   === gender and sexuality ===  novelists often will be assessed in contemporary criticism based on their gender or treatment of gender. largely  this has to do with the dominance of men in the publishing situation. literary criticism  especially since the rise of feminist theory  pays attention to how women  historically  have experienced a very different set of writing expectations based on their gender  for example  the editors of the feminist companion to literature in english point out   their texts emerge from and intervene in conditions usually very different from those which produced most writing by men.  it is not a question of the subject matter or political stance of a particular author  but of her gender  her position as a woman within the literary marketplace. however   the publishing market s orientation to favor the primary reading audience of women may increasingly skew the market towards female novelists  for this reason  novelist teddy wayne argued in a 2012 salon article titled  the agony of the male novelist  that midlist male novelists are less likely to find success than midlist female novelist  even though men tend to dominate  literary fiction  spaces.the position of women in the literary marketplace can change public conversation about novelists and their place within popular culture  leading to debates over sexism. for example  in 2013  american female novelist amanda filipacchi wrote a new york times editorial challenging wikipedia s categorization of american female novelists within a distinct category  which precipitated a significant amount of press coverage describing  that wikipedia s approach to categorization as sexism. for her  the public representation of women novelists within another category marginalizes and defines women novelists like herself outside of a field of  american novelists  dominated by men. however  other commentators  discussing the controversy also note that by removing such categories as  women novelist  or  lesbian writer  from the description of gendered or sexual minorities  the discover-ability of those authors plummet for other people who share that identity.similarly  because of the conversations brought by feminism  examinations of masculine subjects and an author s performance of  maleness  are prominent in critical studies of novels. for example  some academics studying victorian fiction spend considerable time examining how masculinity shapes and effects the works  because
of its prominence within fiction from the victorian period.   == genre ==  traditionally  the publishing industry has distinguished between  literary fiction  works lauded as achieving greater literary merit  and  genre fiction  novels written within the expectations of genres and published as consumer products. thus  many novelists become slotted as writers of one or the other. novelist kim wright  however  notes that both publishers and traditional literary novelist are turning towards genre fiction because of their potential for financial success and their increasingly positive reception amongst critics. wright gives examples of authors like justin cronin  tom perrotta and colson whitehead all making that transition.however  publishing genre novels does not always allow novelist to continue writing outside the genre or within their own interests. in describing the place within the industry  novelist kim wright says that many authors  especially authors who usually write literary fiction  worry about  the danger that genre is a cul-de-sac  where publishers will only publish similar genre fiction from that author because of reader expectations and that once a writer turns into it  he’ll never get out.  similarly  very few authors start in genre fiction and move to more  literary  publications  wright describes novelists like stephen king as the exception rather than the norm. other critics and writers defending the merits of genre fiction often point towards king as an example of bridging the gap between popular genres and literary merit.   == role and objective ==  both literary critics and novelists question what role novelists play in society and within art. for example   eudora welty writing in 1965 for  in her essay  must the novelist crusade  draws a distinction between novelists who report reality by  taking life as it already exists  not to report it  but to make an object  toward the end that the finished work might contain this life inside it  and offer it to the reader  and journalists  whose role is to act as  crusaders  advocating for particular positions  and using their craft as a political tool. similarly  writing in the 1950s  ralph ellison in his essay  society  morality  and the novel  sees the novelist as needing to  re-create reality in the forms which his personal vision assumes as it plays and struggles with the vivid illusory  eidetic-like  imagery left in the mind s eye by the process of social change.  however  ellison also describes novelists of the lost generation  like ernest hemingway  not taking full advantage of the moral weight and influence available to novelists  pointing to mark twain and herman melville as better examples. a number of such essays  such as literary critic frank norris s  responsibilities of a novelist  highlight such moral and ethical justifications for their approach to both writing novels and criticizing
them.when defining her description of the role of the modernist novelist in the essay  modern fiction  virginia woolf argues for a representation of life not interested in the exhaustive specific details represented in realism in favor of representing a  myriad of impressions  created in experience life. her definition made in this essay  and developed in others  helped define the literary movement of modernist literature. she argues that the novelist should represent  not a series of gig-lamps symmetrically arranged  [rather] life is luminous halo  a semitransparent envelope surrounding us from the beginning of the conscious to the end. is it not the task of the novelist to convey this varying  this unknown and uncircumscribed spirit  whatever aberration or complexity it may display  with as little mixture of the alien and external as possible    == see also ==  author category novelists  a category containing all wikipedia articles about novelists imagination list of novelists by genre list of novelists by nationality narrative storytelling   == references ==   === works cited === kundera  milan (october 9  2006).  what is a novelist . the new yorker (life and letters section)  40. o conner  flannery.  novelist and believer . catholicculture.org.
a tattoo artist (also tattooer or tattooist) is an individual who applies permanent decorative tattoos  often in an established business called a  tattoo shop   tattoo studio  or  tattoo parlour.  tattoo artists usually learn their craft via an apprenticeship under a trained and experienced mentor.   == apprenticeships == a tattoo artist traditionally earns the title by completing an apprenticeship under strict guidelines from an experienced senior tattoo artist. a tattoo apprenticeship can last as long as five years. the apprentice will be trained in sanitation and proper safety techniques  typically during the first six months to a year of the apprenticeship. during this time  the apprentice is not allowed to tattoo  but will be expected to maintain the cleanliness of the studio and learn by observation. the cost of apprenticing can range from free labor around the shop to tens of thousands of dollars. apprentices are generally expected to be excellent at drawing  with an ability to excel at customising design ideas and genres  as well as various other styles of art in general.   == artwork == tattoo artists can create original tattoo designs for their customers  or they may use flash (pre-drawn  stock images that can be traced onto the skin) or variations of known designs.   == tools == some of the tools of the trade have greatly evolved while some have stayed the same  such as the tattoo machine. the traditional machine has not changed from its original design and/or concept. with the rise of new machine designs  however  both air- and electric-powered tools such as the rotary and pneumatic tattoo machine have made their way into the industry.  a practitioner may also use many different needle sets  such as round liner needles  round shader needles  flat shaders  and magnum (mag) needles. the amount of needles attached to the needle bar change  as well. for instance  large magnum needle groups range from 15 to 55 needles on one bar. a practitioner must have the basic tools to provide a tattoo. all other items at the artist s disposal are as different as each tattoo. basic tools include the tattoo machine  power supply  clip cord  foot pedal  grip  tips  grip stem  needles  and tattoo ink. in the uk equipment must only be sold to registered studios who are provided a certificate by their local environmental health department.   == studio ==   === policies and regulations ===  the properly equipped tattoo studio will use biohazard containers for objects that have come into contact with blood or bodily fluids  sharps containers for old needles  and an autoclave for sterilizing tools. certain jurisdictions also require studios by law to have a sink in the work area supplied with both hot and cold water. proper hygiene requires a body modification artist to wash his or her hands before starting to prepare a
client for the stencil  between clients  after a tattoo has been completed  and at any other time where cross contamination can occur. the use of single use disposable gloves is also mandatory.  in some countries and u.s. states it is illegal to tattoo a minor even with parental consent  and it is usually not allowed to tattoo impaired persons (e.g. someone intoxicated or under the influence of drugs)  people with contraindicated skin conditions  those who are pregnant or nursing  or those incapable of consent due to mental incapacity. before the tattooing begins the client is asked to approve the position of the applied stencil.  after approval is given the artist will open new  sterile needle packages in front of the client  and always use new  sterile or sterile disposable instruments and supplies  and fresh ink for each session (loaded into disposable ink caps which are discarded after each client). also  all areas which may be touched with contaminated gloves will be wrapped in clear plastic to prevent cross-contamination. equipment that cannot be autoclaved (such as countertops  machines  and furniture) will be cleaned with a low level disinfectant and then wiped with an approved high level disinfectant. the local health department can/will do a hands on inspection of tattoo studios every 4 months in the state of tennessee. the venue will be graded based on the areas being inspected. if the studio passes an inspection  the health department will sign off on a passing scorecard and the studio will be required to show their score publicly. if the studio fails an inspection  they will be given the opportunity to correct the mistakes (if minor) or be fined (major health risks) and can also be placed out of business on the spot. also  the possession of a working autoclave is mandatory in most states. an autoclave is a medical sterilization device used to sterilize stainless steel. the autoclave itself will be inspected by the health department and required to submit weekly spore tests. however if these jurisdictions are up to date  they will not require an autoclave if the practitioners are using 100% disposable tubes and grips which are made of plastic and some grips are made of rubber. these come pre-sterilized for one time use. membership in professional organizations  or certificates of appreciation/achievement  generally helps artists to be aware of the latest trends. however  many of the most notable tattooists do not belong to any association. while specific requirements to become a tattooist vary between jurisdictions  many mandate only formal training in blood-borne pathogens  and cross contamination. the local department of health regulates tattoo studios in many jurisdictions. for example  according to the health departments in oregon and hawaii  tattoo artists in these states are required to take and pass a test ascertaining their knowledge of health and safety precautions  as well as the current state regulations. performing a tattoo in oregon state without a
proper and current license or in an unlicensed facility is considered a felony offense.   == representation in popular culture ==   ==  scratchers  == people who tattoo without proper training in the art of tattooing are commonly known as  scratchers . scratchers often operate from home  but may also operate from an unlicensed studio. in addition  scratchers may offer reduced rates in order to attract customers away from professional tattoo shops. in the usa  practicing without a license is a criminal offense in many states.the practice of tattooing without proper training also carries serious health risks. studies have shown that there is a significant risk of contracting hepatitis c when tattoos are carried out using cheap  non-sterilized tattooing equipment. these risks are found to be higher on unregulated premises.in the uk  plymouth city council launched a campaign in 2014 to crack down on  scratchers  operating within the city  in an attempt to reduce infection and injury through better awareness and training around infection control.    == see also == list of tattoo artists   == references ==
flight attendant or (also known as steward/stewardess or air host/air hostess) is a member of an aircrew employed by airlines aboard commercial flights  primarily to ensure the safety and comfort of passengers. collectively called the cabin crew  flight attendants are deployed in the cabins of all commercial flights and additionally may also be present on some private or business jets and government or military aircraft.   == history ==  the role of a flight attendant derives from that of similar positions on passenger ships or passenger trains  but it has more direct involvement with passengers because of the confined quarters on aircraft. additionally  the job of a flight attendant revolves around safety to a much greater extent than those of similar staff on other forms of transportation. flight attendants on board a flight collectively form a cabin crew  as distinguished from pilots and engineers in the cockpit. the german heinrich kubis was the world s first flight attendant  in 1912. kubis first attended the passengers on board the delag zeppelin lz 10 schwaben. he also attended to the famous lz 129 hindenburg and was on board when it burst into flames. he survived by jumping out a window when it neared the ground.origins of the word  steward  in transportation are reflected in the term  chief steward  as used in maritime transport terminology. the term purser and chief steward are often used interchangeably describing personnel with similar duties among seafaring occupations. this lingual derivation results from the international british maritime tradition (i.e. chief mate) dating back to the 14th century and the civilian united states merchant marine on which us aviation is somewhat modelled. due to international conventions and agreements  in which all ships  personnel who sail internationally are similarly documented by their respective countries  the u.s. merchant marine assigns such duties to the chief steward in the overall rank and command structure of which pursers are not positionally represented or rostered. imperial airways of the united kingdom had  cabin boys  or  stewards  in the 1920s. in the us  stout airways was the first to employ stewards in 1926  working on ford trimotor planes between detroit and grand rapids  michigan. western airlines (1928) and pan american world airways (pan am) (1929) were the first us carriers to employ stewards to serve food. ten-passenger fokker aircraft used in the caribbean had stewards in the era of gambling trips to havana  cuba from key west  florida. lead flight attendants would in many instances also perform the role of purser  steward  or chief steward in modern aviation terminology.  the first female flight attendant was a 25-year-old registered nurse named ellen church. hired by united airlines in 1930  she also first envisioned nurses on aircraft. other airlines followed suit  hiring nurses to serve as flight attendants  then called  stewardesses  or  air hostesses  on most of their flights. in the united states  the
job was one of only a few in the 1930s to permit women  which  coupled with the great depression  led to large numbers of applicants for the few positions available. two thousand women applied for just 43 positions offered by transcontinental and western airlines in december 1935.  female flight attendants rapidly replaced male ones  and by 1936  they had all but taken over the role. they were selected not only for their knowledge but also for their characteristics. a 1936 new york times article described the requirements  the girls who qualify for hostesses must be petite  weight 100 to 118 pounds  height 5 feet to 5 feet 4 inches  age 20 to 26 years. add to that the rigid physical examination each must undergo four times every year  and you are assured of the bloom that goes with perfect health. three decades later  a 1966 new york times classified ad for stewardesses at eastern airlines listed these requirements  a high school graduate  single (widows and divorcees with no children considered)  20 years of age (girls 19​1⁄2 may apply for future consideration). 5 2  but no more than 5 9  weight 105 to 135 in proportion to height and have at least 20/40 vision without glasses. appearance was considered as one of the most important factors to become a stewardess. at that time  airlines believed that the exploitation of female sexuality would increase their profits  thus the uniforms of female flight attendants were often formfitting  complete with white gloves and high heels.  in the united states  they were required to be unmarried and were fired if they decided to wed. the requirement to be a registered nurse on an american airline was relaxed as more women were hired  and disappeared almost entirely during world war ii as many nurses joined military nurse corps. ruth carol taylor was the first african-american flight attendant in the united states. hired in december 1957  on february 11  1958  taylor was the flight attendant on a mohawk airlines flight from ithaca to new york  the first time such a position had been held by an african american. she was let go within six months as a result of mohawk s then-common marriage ban.the u.s. equal employment opportunity commission s first complainants were female flight attendants complaining of age discrimination  weight requirements  and bans on marriage. (originally female flight attendants were fired if they reached age 32 or 35 depending on the airline  were fired if they exceeded weight regulations  and were required to be single upon hiring and fired if they got married.) in 1968  the eeoc declared age restrictions on flight attendants’ employment to be illegal sex discrimination under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964. also in 1968  the eeoc ruled that sex was not a bona fide occupational requirement to be a flight attendant. the restriction of hiring only women
was lifted at all airlines in 1971 due to the decisive court case of diaz vs. pan am. the no-marriage rule was eliminated throughout the us airline industry by the 1980s. the last such broad categorical discrimination  the weight restrictions  were relaxed in the 1990s through litigation and negotiations. airline still often have vision and height requirements and may require flight attendants to pass a medical evaluation.as there will be 41 030 new airliners by 2036  boeing expects 839 000 new cabin crew members from 2017 till then  298 000 in asia pacific (37%)  169 000 in north america (21%) and 151 000 in europe (19%).   == overview == the role of a flight attendant is to  provide routine services and respond to emergencies to ensure the safety and comfort of airline passengers while aboard planes . however  particularly in the usa flight attendants often state that they are there  primarily for [the passenger s] safety .typically flight attendants require holding a high school diploma or equivalent  and in the usa the median annual wage for flight attendants was $50 500 in may 2017  higher than the median for all workers of $37 690.the number of flight attendants required on flights is mandated by each country s regulations. in the us  for light planes with 19 or less seats  or  if weighing more than 7 500 pounds  9 or less seats  no flight attendant is needed  on larger aircraft  one flight attendant per 50 passenger seats is required.the majority of flight attendants for most airlines are female  though a substantial number of males have entered the industry since 1980.   === responsibilities ===  prior to each flight  flight attendants attend a safety briefing with the pilots and lead flight attendant. during this briefing  they go over safety and emergency checklists  the locations and amounts of emergency equipment and other features specific to that aircraft type. boarding particulars are verified  such as special needs passengers  small children travelling as unaccompanied or vips. weather conditions are discussed including anticipated turbulence. prior to each flight a safety check is conducted to ensure all equipment such as life-vests  torches (flash lights) and firefighting equipment are on board  in the right quantity  and in proper condition. any unserviceable or missing items must be reported and rectified prior to take-off. they must monitor the cabin for any unusual smells or situations. they assist with the loading of carry-on baggage  checking for weight  size and dangerous goods. they make sure those sitting in emergency exit rows are willing and able to assist in an evacuation and move those who are not willing or able out of the row into another seat. they then must do a safety demonstration or monitor passengers as they watch a safety video. they then must  secure the cabin  ensuring tray tables are stowed  seats are in their upright positions
 armrests down and carry-ons stowed correctly and seat belts are fastened prior to take-off. all the service between boarding and take-off is called pre take off service.  once up in the air  flight attendants will usually serve drinks and/or food to passengers using an airline service trolley. when not performing customer service duties  flight attendants must periodically conduct cabin checks and listen for any unusual noises or situations. checks must also be done on the lavatory to ensure the smoke detector hasn t been disabled or destroyed and to restock supplies as needed. regular cockpit checks must be done to ensure the health and safety of the pilot(s). they must also respond to call lights dealing with special requests. during turbulence  flight attendants must ensure the cabin is secure. prior to landing  all loose items  trays and rubbish must be collected and secured along with service and galley equipment. all hot liquids must be disposed of. a final cabin check must then be completed prior to landing. it is vital that flight attendants remain aware as the majority of emergencies occur during take-off and landing. upon landing  flight attendants must remain stationed at exits and monitor the airplane and cabin as passengers disembark the plane. they also assist any special needs passengers and small children off the airplane and escort children  while following the proper paperwork and id process to escort them to the designated person picking them up. flight attendants are trained to deal with a wide variety of emergencies  and are trained in first aid. more frequent situations may include a bleeding nose  illness  small injuries  intoxicated passengers  aggressive and anxiety stricken passengers. emergency training includes rejected take-offs  emergency landings  cardiac and in-flight medical situations  smoke in the cabin  fires  depressurization  on-board births and deaths  dangerous goods and spills in the cabin  emergency evacuations  hijackings  and water landings.   === chief purser === the chief purser (cp)  also titled as in-flight service manager (ism)  flight service manager (fsm)  customer service manager (csm) or cabin service director (csd) is the senior flight attendant in the chain of command of flight attendants.  while not necessarily the most-senior crew members on a flight (in years of service to their respective carrier)  chief pursers can have varying levels of  in-flight  or  on board  bidding seniority or tenure in relation to their flying partners.  to reach this position  a crew member requires some minimum years of service as flight attendant. further training is mandatory  and chief pursers typically earn a higher salary than flight attendants because of the added responsibility and managerial role.   === purser === the purser is in charge of the cabin crew  in a specific section of a larger aircraft  or the whole aircraft itself (if the purser is the highest ranking). on board a larger aircraft  pursers assist the
chief purser in managing the cabin. pursers are flight attendants or a related job  typically with an airline for several years prior to application for  and further training to become a purser  and normally earn a higher salary than flight attendants because of the added responsibility and supervisory role.   == qualifications ==   === training === flight attendants are normally trained in the hub or headquarters city of an airline over a period that may run from four weeks to six months  depending on the country and airline. the main focus of training is safety  and attendants will be checked out for each type of aircraft in which they work. one of the most elaborate training facilities was breech academy  which trans world airlines (twa) opened in 1969 in overland park  kansas. other airlines were to also send their attendants to the school. however  during the fare wars  the school s viability declined and it closed around 1988. safety training includes  but is not limited to  emergency passenger evacuation management  use of evacuation slides/life rafts  in-flight firefighting  first aid  cpr  defibrillation  ditching/emergency landing procedures  decompression emergencies  crew resource management  and security. in the united states  the federal aviation administration requires flight attendants on aircraft with 20 or more seats and used by an air carrier for transportation to hold a certificate of demonstrated proficiency. this is not considered to be the equivalent of an airman certificate (license)  although it is issued on the same card stock. it shows that a level of required training has been met. it is not limited to the air carrier at which the attendant is employed (although some initial documents showed the airlines where the holders were working)  and is the attendant s personal property. it does have two ratings  group 1 and group 2 (listed on the certificate as  group i  and  group ii ). either or both of these may be earned depending upon the general type of aircraft  (propeller or turbojet)  on which the holder has trained.there are also training schools  not affiliated with any particular airline  where students generally not only undergo generic  though otherwise practically identical  training to flight attendants employed by an airline  but also take curriculum modules to help them gain employment. these schools often use actual airline equipment for their lessons  though some are equipped with full simulator cabins capable of replicating a number of emergency situations. in some countries  such as france  a degree is required  together with the certificat de formation à la sécurité (safety training certificate).   === language === multilingual flight attendants are often in demand to accommodate international travellers. the languages most in demand  other than english  are french   russian  hindi  spanish  mandarin  cantonese  bengali  japanese  arabic  german  portuguese
 italian  turkish  and greek. in the united states  airlines with international routes pay an additional stipend for language skills on top of flight pay  and some airlines hire specifically for certain languages when launching international destinations.   === height === most airlines have height requirements for safety reasons  making sure that all flight attendants can reach overhead safety equipment. typically  the acceptable height for this is 150 to 185 cm (4 ft 11 in to 6 ft 1 in) tall. some airlines  such as eva air  have height requirements for purely aesthetic purposes. regional carriers using small aircraft with low ceilings can have height restrictions.   == uniforms and presentation ==  the first flight attendant uniforms were designed to be durable  practical  and inspire confidence in passengers. in the 1930s  the first female flight attendants dressed in uniforms resembling nurses  outfits. the first female flight attendants for united airlines wore green berets  green capes and nurse s shoes. other airlines  such as eastern air lines  actually dressed female flight attendants in nurses  uniforms. both male and female flight attendants for hawaiian airlines wear aloha shirts as their uniform.  many early uniforms had a strongly military appearance  hats  jackets  and skirts showed simple straight lines and military details like epaulettes and brass buttons. many uniforms had a summer and winter version  differentiated by colours and fabrics appropriate to the season  navy blue for winter  for example  khaki for summer. but as the role of women in the air grew  and airline companies began to realise the publicity value of their female flight attendants  more feminine lines and colours began to appear in the late 1930s and early 1940s. some airlines began to commission designs from high-end department stores and still others called in noted designers or even milliners to create distinctive and attractive apparel. during the 1960s  pacific southwest airlines (psa) was known for brightly colored female flight attendant uniforms that included short miniskirts. in the early 1970s  the uniform changed to hotpants.since the 1980s to present  asian airlines  especially national flag carrier ones  usually feature the traditional dress and fabrics of their respective country in their female flight attendants  uniform. it was meant as a marketing strategy to showcase their national culture as well as to convey welcoming warmth and hospitality. for example  thai airways flight attendants are required to change from their corporate purple suits into traditional thai costume prior to passengers boarding. while the uniform of garuda indonesia female flight attendants is a modified kebaya  inspired by the traditional batik motif of parang gondosuli  the motif is called lereng garuda indonesia. malaysian and singapore airlines flight attendants wear batik prints in their uniform. vietnam airlines  flight attendants wear red áo dài and air india flight attendants wear a sari on all passenger flights. during the mid-1990s  several us-based airlines
required female flight attendants to wear shoes with heels. minimum heel heights ranged from one-half inch to the two inches mandated by usair. flight attendants at times avoided censure by changing into more comfortable shoes during flights  since their supervisors were less likely to be present there.in 2015  the israeli airline el al introduced a requirement that female flight attendants wear high heels until passengers had been seated. the airline s workers  union stated that the requirement would endanger the health and safety of the flight attendants and instructed its members to ignore the rule. later that year the requirement was removed.until 2016 some female crew members on british airways were required to wear british airways  standard  ambassador  uniform  which has not traditionally included trousers.in 2019  virgin atlantic began to allow its female flight attendants to wear pants and not wear makeup.flight attendants are generally expected to show a high level of personal grooming such as use of cosmetics (for women) and thorough personal hygiene. most airlines require flight attendants not have any tattoos visible when a uniform is worn. these requirements are designed to give the airlines a positive presentation.in several airlines in the islamic world  such as egypt air  iran air and saudia  female flight attendants  uniforms have added a hijab to conform to the islamic customs.   == health conditions == a 2018 study found higher instances of breast cancer  melanoma  uterine  gastrointestinal  cervical  and thyroid cancers reported in flight attendants in contrast to the general population. specifically  the increased cancer cases reported were seen in breast cancer (3.4% of flight crew compared to 2.3% in the general population - a 50% increase)  cervical cancer (1.0% compared to 0.70%)  gastrointestinal cancer (0.47% compared to 0.27% - a 74% increase)  thyroid cancer (0.67% compared to 0.56%) and higher rates of both melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancers with reports of the latter increasing with every five years spent in the job. the study did not look into what causes this increase  but the authors said increased exposure to ionizing radiation from time spent in the thinner upper atmosphere  poor cabin air quality as well as disrupted sleep and meal cycles could be factors.other studies have found increased rates of breast and skin cancer  reduced respiratory health  adverse reproductive and perinatal outcomes  musculoskeletal injuries  and higher rates of mental health conditions in flight attendants.   === radiation === flight attendants and crew members are known to be exposed to cosmic ionizing radiation which is a form of radiation that comes from space and intensifies as you get higher in the air. the international agency for research on cancer of the world health organization lists ionizing radiation as a known human carcinogen. passengers are also exposed to this type of cosmic radiation  but they spend a considerably less amount of time on the average in the air than crew members. an online travel
agency report found  in particular  that travelling adults in britain spend on average 306 hours on flights to holiday destinations during their lifetime. in contrast  according to the us federal aviation administration  a flight attendant can spend up to 30 hours of flight time in seven consecutive days and in some cases more. the effect of cosmic radiation on air crew members is a subject of a growing body of research.cabin crew members are also regularly exposed to more uv radiation than the general population  which can make these workers more vulnerable to skin cancers.the u.s. national council on radiation protection (ncrp) reports that aircrew have the largest average annual effective dose of all u.s. radiation workers.   === cabin air quality === poor cabin air quality is a subject of ongoing study in relation to symptoms such as headache  fatigue  fever  and respiratory difficulties among many others that have been reported by flight attendants  particularly on long-haul routes. there is also much concern regarding the transmission of contagious diseases  particularly tuberculosis. an open question remains whether these complaints are due to poor cabin air quality or to other factors inherent in flights  such as lowered barometric pressure  hypoxia  low humidity  etc. other chemical contaminants found in the cabin may include engine leakages  pesticides and flame retardants  which contain compounds that may act as hormone disruptors and increase the risk of some cancers.   === sleep disruption === flight attendants often have disrupted sleep cycles. they are more likely to have disruptions in their sleep patterns because they may work at night  cross time zones  and have irregular schedules. there is some evidence linking sleep disruptions to increased cancer risk. flight attendants may also have different lifestyle behaviours related to diet  physical activity  and health care than the general population which could affect overall health and cancer risk.   === secondhand tobacco smoke === many of the flight attendants working today were exposed to second-hand in-flight smoke until 1998 with partial smoking bans enacted in 1988. the long-term effects of this historical secondhand smoke exposure have not been well characterized.   == sexual harassment == flight attendants are exposed to verbal and sexual harassment. studies in the united states and australia have found that the vast majority (two-thirds) of flight attendants experience sexual harassment in the course of their careers  including sexual assault  inappropriate touching and sexual comments both by colleagues and passengers. flight attendants describe the verbal sexual harassment as comments that are “nasty  unwanted  lewd  crude  inappropriate  uncomfortable  sexual  suggestive  and dirty.” they also report being subjected to passengers’ explicit sexual fantasies  propositions  request for sexual “favours” and pornographic videos and pictures.the studies also found that 70% of flight attendants who experience sexual harassment on the job  chose not to report the incident because they did not think it would be dealt with
appropriately or they were concerned reporting it would make the situation worse  and  their airline was not doing enough to put a stop to harassment  and that  they have not noticed any employer efforts over the past year to address sexual harassment at work.    == emotional labor == the concept of emotional labour as the process of managing feelings and expressions to fulfil the emotional requirements of a job through a publicly visible facial and bodily display within the workplace (as opposed to the concept of emotion work  i.e. the management of one s feelings in private life) was first established and linked to the profession of flight attendants by professor emirita of sociology arlie hochschild  in her book  the managed heart. according to hochschild  flight attendants do emotional labour to enhance the status of the customer and entice further sales by their friendliness  and support this effort by evoking feelings that make the  nice  display seem natural. with regard to how flight attendants are supposed to use their smile in the job  the author writes [i]n the flight attendant’s work  smiling is separated from its usual function  which is to express a personal feeling  and attached to another one—expressing a company feeling. the company exhorts them to smile more  and “more sincerely ” at an increasing number of passengers. the workers respond to the speed-up with a slowdown  they smile less broadly  with a quick release and no sparkle in the eyes  thus dimming the company’s message to the people. it is a war of smiles. hochschild notes that corporate logic in the airline industry generates a series of links between competition  market expansion  advertising  heightened passenger expectations about rights to display  and company demands for acting  and when conditions allow this logic to work  private use of emotional exchange gives way to corporate use of emotional exchange.hochschild also writes of how flight attendants are trained to control passengers  feelings during times of turbulence and dangerous situations while suppressing their own fear or anxiety.the emotional labour performed by flight attendants and cross-cultural aspects of it have since been actively studied and are a topic of ongoing research.   == in advertising ==  in the 1960s and 1970s  many airlines began advertising the attractiveness and friendliness of their stewardesses. national airlines began a  fly me  campaign using attractive female flight attendants with taglines such as  i m lorraine. fly me to orlando.  (a low budget 1973 film about three flight attendants  fly me  starring lenore kasdorf  was based on the ad campaign.) braniff international airways presented a campaign known as the  air strip  with similarly attractive young female flight attendant changing uniforms mid-flight. in the united states  many airlines had a policy such that only unmarried women could be flight attendants  as well as a mandatory retirement age of
32 for stewardesses because of the belief women would be less appealing and attractive after this age. in 1968  the eeoc declared age restrictions on flight attendants’ employment to be illegal sex discrimination under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964.flight attendant roz hanby became a minor celebrity when she became the face of british airways in their  fly the flag  advertising campaign over a 7-year period in the 1980s. singapore airlines is currently one of the few airlines still choosing to use the image of their female flight attendants  known as singapore girls  in their advertising material. however  this is starting to be phased out  in favor of advertising which emphasises the modernity of their fleet.   == unions == flight attendant unions were formed  beginning at united airlines in the 1940s  to negotiate improvements in pay  benefits and working conditions. those unions would later challenge what they perceived as sexist stereotypes and unfair work practices such as age limits  size limits  limitations on marriage  and prohibition of pregnancy. many of these limitations have been lifted by judicial mandates. the largest flight attendants  union is the association of flight attendants  representing nearly 60 000 flight attendants at 19 airlines within the us.the association of professional flight attendants represents the flight attendants of american airlines  the world s largest carrier. apfa is the largest independent flight attendant union in the world.in the uk  cabin crew can be represented by either cabin crew  89  or the much larger and more powerful transport and general workers  union. in australia  flight attendants are represented by the flight attendants  association of australia (faaa). there are two divisions  one for international crews (long-haul) and one for domestic crews (short-haul). in new zealand  flight attendants can be represented by either the flight attendants and related services association (farsa) or by the engineering  printing and manufacturing union (epmu). in canada  flight attendants are represented by either the canadian union of public employees (cupe) or by the canadian flight attendants union (cfau).   === discrimination === originally female flight attendants were required to be single upon hiring  and were fired if they got married  exceeded weight regulations  or reached age 32 or 35 depending on the airline. in the 1970s the group stewardesses for women s rights protested sexist advertising and company discrimination  and brought many cases to court. in 1964 united states president lyndon b. johnson signed the civil rights act into law which prohibited sex discrimination and led to the creation of the equal employment opportunity commission in 1968. the eeoc ruled that sex was not a bona fide occupational requirement to be a flight attendant. for stewardesses  this meant that they had an official governing body to report offences to and allowed them to successfully challenge age ceiling and marriage bans in relation to their effectiveness as employees.in 1968  the eeoc
declared age restrictions on flight attendants’ employment to be illegal sex discrimination under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964.  the restriction of hiring only women was lifted at all airlines in 1971 due to the decisive court case of diaz vs. pan am. the no-marriage rule was eliminated throughout the us airline industry by the 1980s. the last such broad categorical discrimination  the weight restrictions  were relaxed in the 1990s through litigation and negotiations. by the end of the 1970s  the term stewardess had generally been replaced by the gender-neutral alternative flight attendant. more recently the term cabin crew or cabin staff has begun to replace  flight attendants  in some parts of the world  because of the term s recognition of their role as members of the crew.   == roles in emergencies == actions of flight attendants in emergencies have long been credited in saving lives  in the united states  the national transportation safety board (ntsb) and other aviation authorities view flight attendants as essential for safety  and are thus usually required on part 121 aircraft operations.  studies  some done in light of british airtours flight 28m  have concluded that assertive cabin crew are essential for the rapid evacuation of aeroplanes. notable examples of cabin crew actions include    === september 11  2001 === the role of flight attendants received heightened prominence after the september 11 attacks when flight attendants (such as sandra w. bradshaw and ceecee lyles of united airlines flight 93  robert fangman of united airlines flight 175  renee may of american airlines flight 77  and betty ong and madeline amy sweeney of american airlines flight 11) actively attempted to protect passengers from assault  and also provided vital information to air traffic controllers on the hijackings  as did many other passengers.in the wake of these attacks  many flight attendants at major airlines were laid off because of decreased passenger loads.   === other emergencies === in april 1936  flight attendant nellie granger aided survivors after the crash of twa flight 1  then walked 4 mi (6.4 km) through a snowstorm to find help  before returning to the crash scene.senior purser neerja bhanot saved the lives of passengers and crew when pan am flight 73 was hijacked. she was killed while protecting children from the terrorists. after her death she received the special courage award from the united states department of justice and india s highest civilian honor for bravery  the ashoka chakra (military decoration). naila nazir  pakistani flight attendant (employee of pakistan international airlines) who received 1985 s flight safety foundation (fsf) heroism award for her brave handling of tense and dangerous situation during 13 days of flight pk-326 hijacking ordeal. british airtours flight 28m  the two forward flight attendants  arthur bradbury and joanna toff  repeatedly crawled into the smoked filled and burning cabin to drag a number of passengers to safety  and
were subsequently awarded the queen s gallantry medal. the two rear flight attendants  sharon ford and jacqui ubanski  who opened the rear doors but were overwhelmed by fire and smoke were awarded the same medal posthumously. scandinavian airlines flight 751  when cabin crew recognised an emergency landing was imminent and commanded the passengers to  bend down ... hold your knees  to adopt the brace position. atlantic southeast airlines flight 529  whose sole flight attendant  robin fech  provided emergency briefings  brace and evacuation commands to the passengers when the embraer emb 120 brasilia aircraft sustained serious damage to one of its engines and crash landed. the ntsb accident report commended  the exemplary manner in which the flight attendant briefed the passengers and handled the emergency . boac flight 712  where a flight attendant  barbara jane harrison died saving passengers from an on-board fire and was posthumously awarded the george cross. british airways flight 5390  in which a flight attendant was able to prevent a pilot from being lost through a cockpit window that had failed. southern airways flight 242  on which the cabin crew provided safety briefings to their passengers  and on their own initiative  warned passengers of the impending crash by commanding passengers to adopt the brace position. at least one flight attendant is known to have assisted in rescuing trapped passengers. air florida flight 90  in which kelly duncan  the lone surviving flight attendant  passed the only life vest she could find to another passenger. she is recognised in the ntsb report for this  unselfish act.  twa flight attendant uli derickson who protected passengers during the twa flight 847 hijacking by assisting with negotiation efforts. twa flight 843  when a twa lockheed l-1011 aircraft crashed after an aborted takeoff in 1992. the aircraft was destroyed by fire. nine flight attendants  along with five off-duty flight attendants  evacuated all 292 persons on board without loss of life. the ntsb in their after accident reported noted   the performance of the flight attendants during the emergency was exceptional and probably contributed to the success of the emergency evacuation.  on british airways flight 2069  cabin crew stopped the plane from being crashed by a mentally ill passenger. crew on american airlines flight 63 prevented shoe bomber richard colvin reid from blowing up the plane. flight attendants on qantas flight 1737 prevented their plane from being hijacked by a passenger with mental health issues. two of them were taken to hospital with stab wounds. aloha airlines flight 243 suffered a decompression which tore an 18-foot (5.5 m) section of fuselage away from the plane. the only fatality was flight attendant c.b. lansing who was blown out of the airplane. flight attendant michelle honda was thrown violently to the floor during the decompression but  despite her injuries  crawled up and down the aisle reassuring passengers. flight attendants on air canada flight 797 (sergio benetti  judi davidson
 laura kayama) used procedures which were not specifically taught in training such as moving passengers to the front of the aircraft to move them away from the fire and smoke  and passing out towels for passengers to cover their nose and mouths with while the cabin was filling with smoke. chief flight attendant sergio benetti was the first to open the front door of the aircraft  and escaped out that way  leaving all passengers and other crew behind. usair flight attendant richard demary helped to evacuate surviving passengers and another crew member from the burning wreckage of usair flight 1016  which crashed during a go-around in adverse weather conditions after a failed landing attempt at charlotte douglas international airport. flight attendants on us airways flight 1549 successfully evacuated all passengers from the aircraft within 90 seconds despite the fact that the rear was rapidly filling with water. nine cabin crew members aboard air france flight 358 successfully evacuated the aircraft within 90 seconds after the a340-300 overran a runway at toronto pearson international airport. the ntsb stated that the actions of the cabin crew contributed to the 100% survival rate. the flight attendants of philippine airlines flight 434 kept the passengers calm after a bomb exploded during the flight from cebu to tokyo. though one passenger was killed during the explosion  they took care of the injured passengers.some exception include air canada flight 797  where the investigative board found that the flight attendant in charge s  misleading  reports about the fire  influenced the captain s decision to delay the initiation of a descent  and that such  delay increased the time for the fire to propagate and the time that passengers were exposed to the toxic environment before the airplane could be evacuated.  the accident killed 23 passengers  none of the flight attendants sustained any injuries. chief flight attendant sergio benetti was the first to open the front door of the aircraft  and escaped out that way  leaving all passengers and other crew behind.   == in popular culture ==  1933  air hostess portrays a love story about a flight attendant (evalyn knapp) and a pilot (james murray). 1947  the vicki barr  flight stewardess book series  in which vicki s career  brings her glamorous friends  exciting adventures  loyal roommates and dates with a hand some young pilot and  an up-and-coming reporter  sells well in the us. 1950  in batman #62 (december/january)  it is revealed that catwoman is an amnesiac flight attendant who had turned to crime after suffering a prior blow to the head during a plane crash she survived. the name of the airline she worked for was speed airlines. 1951  three guys named mike is a film about flight attendant marcy (jane wyman) who has to choose between three admirers and becomes an advertising icon. 1955  out of the clouds  british drama film directed by basil dearden  and
starring anthony steel  robert beatty and james robertson justice. an ealing studios production  the film is composed of small stories dealing with the passengers and crew on a day at london airport (the name of heathrow airport 1946–1966). 1956  julie  starring doris day may be the first film to feature a flight attendant piloting a plane to safety  later used in airport 1975 (1975) and parodied in airplane  (1980). 1959  an angel on wheels  a german comedy with romy schneider as a guardian angel who disguises herself as a flight attendant. 1963  come fly with me features dolores hart  pamela tiffin and lois nettleton as air stewardesses who find romance in this adaptation of bernard glemser s 1960 novel   girl on a wing . 1965  boeing boeing  based on a popular play  stars tony curtis as an american journalist in paris who is simultaneously engaged to three different flight attendants. 1965  mickey rooney has a major role as a purser in the movie 24 hours to kill. it was filmed in lebanon using a comet jetliner. 1967  memoir coffee  tea or me  by trudy baker and rachel jones recounts the romantic adventures of two flight attendants. in the late sixties the sexploitation film industry began producing erotic comedies and dramas based on the  swinging stewardess  fantasy image. this  stewardess-sploitation  cycle includes  bedroom stewardesses (germany  1968)  the stewardesses (1969)  stewardesses report (switzerland  1971)  the air stewardess (greece  1971)  swedish fly girls (denmark  1971)  fly me (1973)  the naughty stewardesses (1974)  blazing stewardesses (1975)  and stewardess school (1986). 1978-1979  flying high  short-lived comedy-drama tv series starring connie sellecca about the lives of three attractive flight attendants. 1985   waitress in the sky  a derisive song about a stewardess  appeared on the critically praised album tim by the replacements. 1996  australian comedian caroline reid creates the character  pam ann  to satirise the stereotypical aspects of the job of the female flight attendant. 1997  jackie brown  a quentin tarantino directed crime drama starring pam grier as a flight attendant. 1997  turbulence  action-thriller with lauren holly as a flight attendant. 2001 - 2008  james wysong wrote a series of popular books about his life as a flight attendant under the   wryly chosen  penname  a. frank steward. 2003  view from the top - romantic comedy starring gwyneth paltrow as an aspiring flight attendant. 2003   toxic  music video for britney spears hit single features spears as a sexy stewardess in a highly stylized vintage pan am-style blue uniform. 2003  mile high  british television series features a group of flight attendants working for the fictitious low-cost carrier  fresh . 2004  the single air hostess by busted reaches no. 2 in the uk singles chart. 2006  attention please 
japanese television drama about the training of flight attendants for japan airlines 2007  british pop/bubblegum dance group scooch  comes 22nd in the eurovision song contest 2007 with the song  flying the flag (for you)  featuring flight attendants and including a liberal amount of sexual innuendo. 2008  happy flight  which is about a copilot and flight attendant on an ana flight to hawaii. 2011-2012  pan am  tv series period-piece drama set in 1963-1964 about the lives of pan american world airways stewardesses starring christina ricci and margot robbie. 2014  take off  with the savvy stews premieres on destination america hosted by two flight attendants bobby laurie and gailen david and profiling flight attendant layovers around the world. 2016  neerja an indian movie about neerja bhanot  head flight attendant at the pan am flight 73  who saved the life of her crew and passenger and was awarded ashoka chakra (military decoration)   == notable flight attendants ==  on august 9  2010  steven slater gained immediate global fame when he claimed he was injured by the luggage of a passenger whom he had confronted on an arriving jetblue flight at new york s jfk airport for disregarding his order to remain seated. passengers dispute his account of this confrontation. as the incident continued  he cursed at the passengers over the aircraft s public address system  grabbed a beer  opened the evacuation slide and left the aircraft. he was later arrested and charged with several crimes.on august 30  2014  robert reardon of delta air lines retired at the age of 90 after having eclipsed ron akana of united airlines as the world s longest serving flight attendant and also having been the world s oldest active flight attendant. reardon said the timing of his retirement was   not of his choosing.    == gallery ==                   == see also ==  aircrew (flight crew) ground crew   == references ==   == further reading == barry  kathleen (2007). femininity in flight  a history of flight attendants. durham  nc  duke university press. isbn 978-0822339465. tiemeyer  phil (2013). plane queer  labor  sexuality  and aids in the history of male flight attendants. berkeley  ca  university of california press. vantoch  victoria (2013). the jet sex  airline stewardesses and the making of an american icon. philadelphia  pa  university of pennsylvania press. isbn 978-0-8122-4481-6.   == external links == history of flight attendant review from missjeia.com
an athletic trainer is a certified and licensed health care professional who practices in the field of sports medicine. athletic training has been recognized by the american medical association (ama) as an allied health care profession since 1990.as defined by the strategic implementation team of the national athletic trainers  association (nata) in august 2007   athletic training is practiced by athletic trainers  health care professionals who collaborate with physicians to optimize activity and quality of life for patients both of the physically active and sedentary population. athletic training encompasses the prevention  diagnosis and intervention of emergency  acute and chronic medical conditions involving impairment  functional limitations and disabilities. athletic training encompasses the prevention  examination  diagnosis  treatment  and rehabilitation of emergent  acute or chronic injuries and medical conditions. athletic training is recognized by the american medical association (ama)  health resources services administration (hrsa) and the department of health and human services (hhs) as an allied health care profession.  to become an athletic trainer one must have a bachelor s degree from an accredited professional level education program and then sit for and pass the board of certification (boc) examination. by 2023  all accredited professional programs will be required to provide a master s level education. each state then has its own regulatory agencies that control the practice of athletic training in their state. most states (42) require an athletic trainer to obtain a license in order to practice in that state  5 states (colorado  hawaii  minnesota  oregon  west virginia) require registration  2 states (new york  south carolina) require certification  while california has no state regulations on the practice of athletic training. areas of expertise of certified athletic trainers include        apply protective or injury-preventive devices such as tape  bandages  and braces recognize and evaluate injuries provide first aid or emergency care develop and carry out rehabilitation programs for injured athletes plan and implement comprehensive programs to prevent injury and illness among athletes perform administrative tasks such as keeping records and writing reports on injuries and treatment programsservices rendered by the athletic trainer take place in a wide variety of settings and venues  including actual athletic training facilities  primary schools  universities  inpatient and outpatient physical rehabilitation clinics  hospitals  physician offices  community centers  workplaces  and even the military. emerging settings for athletic training include surgical fellowship opportunities.   == educational programs == the commission on accreditation of athletic training education (caate) oversees the curriculum standards of all accredited professional (entry level) and all of the institutions.  the standards dictate the content of both didactic and clinical practice portions of the educational program.  content areas include  risk management and injury prevention pathology of injuries and illnesses orthopedic clinical examination and assessment medical conditions and disabilities acute care of injuries and illnesses therapeutic modalities conditioning and rehabilitative exercises psychosocial intervention and referral nutritional aspects of
injuries and illnesses healthcare administration professional development and responsibility healthcare professional development and responsibility   == post-professional programs == there are several post-professional masters-level athletic training programs. these programs are for credentialed athletic trainers who desire to become scholars  researchers  and advanced practice professionals. schools with post-professional athletic training masters programs include  a.t. still university  university of hawaii at manoa  illinois state university  indiana state university  indiana university  university of kentucky  michigan state university  western michigan university  university of north carolina chapel hill  ohio university  university of oregon  california university of pennsylvania  temple university  old dominion university  university of toledo  university of virginia  university of missouri  weber state university  university of michigan  and winona state university. there are doctoral programs in athletic training  each with different curricular emphasis. athletic training program in doctoral education is offered by the university of idaho  a.t. still university  and indiana state university.   == treatment population and settings == athletic trainers treat a broad population  from the amateur and professional athlete to the typical patient in need of orthopaedic rehabilitative care. the nata describes typical clients groups as   recreational  amateur and professional athletes individuals who have suffered musculoskeletal injuries those seeking strength  conditioning  fitness and performance enhancement others designated by the physician.services rendered by the athletic trainer take place in a wide variety of settings and venues.  these may include   athletic training clinics schools (k-12  colleges  universities) outpatient rehabilitation clinics hospitals physician offices community facilities workplaces (commercial and government) military installations and veteran medical facilities professional sport organizations   == see also == national athletic trainers  association international sports sciences association board of certification  inc.   == references ==
delivery may refer to   delivery (commerce)  of goods  e.g.  pizza delivery   == film and television == delivering (film)  a 1993 short film by todd field delivery (film)  a 2005 animated short film  delivery  the final episode of men behaving badly julia zemiro s home delivery   a 2013 australian television comedy interview series  the delivery  (the office)  a 2010 episode of the office   == music == the mamas & the papas deliver  1967 deliver (the oak ridge boys album)  1983 deliverin  a 1971 album by poco  deliver  (song)  a 2017 song by fifth harmony  deliver  a song by lupe fiasco from tetsuo & youth  delivery  (song)  a 2007 single by babyshambles delivery (band)  a british rock band   == other uses == delivery  childbirth drug delivery delivery (cricket)  in cricket  a single action of bowling a cricket ball towards the batsman delivery (joke)  of a joke deed ( delivery  in contract law)  as in  signed  sealed & delivered  power delivery or electricity delivery  the process that goes from generation of electricity in the power station to use by the consumer   == see also == deliverance (disambiguation)
an athlete (also sportsman  or sportswoman) is a person who competes in one or more sports that involve physical strength  speed or endurance. the application of the term to those who participate in other activities  such as golf or driving  is somewhat controversial. athletes may be professionals or amateurs. most professional athletes have particularly well-developed physiques obtained by extensive physical training and strict exercise accompanied by a strict dietary regimen.   == definitions ==  the word  athlete  is a romanization of the greek  άθλητὴς  athlētēs  one who participates in a contest  from ἄθλος  áthlos  or ἄθλον  áthlon  a contest or feat. the primary definition of  sportsman  according to webster s third unabridged dictionary (1960) is   a person who is active in sports  as  (a)  one who engages in the sports of the field and especially in hunting or fishing.     == physiology == athletes involved in isotonic exercises have an increased mean left ventricular end-diastolic volume and are less likely to be depressed. due to their strenuous physical activities  athletes are far more likely than the general population to visit massage salons and pay for services from massotherapists and masseurs. athletes whose sport requires endurance more than strength usually have a lower calorie intake than other athletes.   == titles ==   ===  all-round athlete  === an  all-round athlete  is a person who competes in multiple sports at a high level. examples of people who played more than one sport professionally include jim thorpe  lionel conacher  deion sanders  danny ainge  babe zaharias and erin phillips. others include ricky williams  bo jackson  and damon allen  each of whom was drafted both by major league baseball and by professional gridiron football leagues such as the nfl and the cfl. another female example is heather moyse  a multiple winter olympic gold medalist in bobsled and member of the world rugby hall of fame who also represented canada internationally in track cycling and competed at university level in basketball and track and field. japanese athletes such as kazushi sakuraba  kazuyuki fujita  masakatsu funaki and naoya ogawa have successfully performed in professional wrestling (which isn t a sport) and competed in mixed martial arts.   ===  world s greatest athlete  === the title of  world s greatest athlete  traditionally belongs to the world s top competitor in the decathlon (males) and heptathlon (females) in track and field. the decathlon consists of 10 events  100 meters  long jump  shot put  high jump  400 meters  110 m hurdles  discus  pole vault  javelin  and 1500 m. the heptathlon consists of seven events  the 100 m hurdles  high jump  shot put  200 meters  long jump  javelin  and 800 meters. these competitions require an athlete to possess
the whole spectrum of athletic ability in order to be successful including speed  strength  coordination  jumping ability  and endurance. although the title  world s greatest athlete  seems a natural fit for these two events  its traditional association with the decathlon/heptathlon officially began with jim thorpe. during the 1912 olympics in stockholm  sweden  thorpe won the gold medal in the decathlon (among others). thorpe notably also competed professionally in baseball  american football  and basketball  and competed collegiately in track and field  baseball  lacrosse  and did ballroom dancing. king gustav v of sweden  while awarding thorpe the decathlon gold said   you  sir  are the greatest athlete in the world.  that title has become associated with the decathlon event ever since.   == see also == sportswear (activewear) outdoor enthusiast jock (athlete) athlete of the year women s sports   == references ==
sportsman may refer to an outdoorsman  someone who participates in outdoor sporting activities such as hunting  fishing  climbing  and horseback riding. it may also refer to   sportsperson  someone who competes in athletics sportsmanship  conforming to all the rules of game and acting in a fair manner towards the opponent sportsman s association  a uk gun rights group sportsman of the year  an award given by sports illustrated magazine since 1954 the sportsman (1865 newspaper)  a british newspaper  in print until 1924 the sportsman (2006 newspaper)  a british newspaper  in print from march to october 2006 the sportsman (melbourne)  an australian newspaper  in print from 1881 to 1904 the sportsman  a passenger train of the chesapeake and ohio railway from washington  dc to cincinnati  oh and detroit  mi via huntington  wv and columbus  oh sportsman channel  a us cable channel devoted to hunting and fishing acme sportsman  an american light aircraft built in 1928 dodge sportsman  a dodge b-series van manufactured from 1971–1979 remington sportsman 48  a remington arms shotgun sportsman s park  a baseball stadium in st. louis  missouri sportsman airpark  an airport in oregon
swimming is the self-propulsion of a person through water  usually for recreation  sport  exercise  or survival.  locomotion is achieved through coordinated movement of the limbs  the body  or both.  humans can hold their breath underwater and undertake rudimentary locomotive swimming within weeks of birth  as a survival response.swimming is consistently among the top public recreational activities  and in some countries  swimming lessons are a compulsory part of the educational curriculum.  as a formalized sport  swimming features in a range of local  national  and international competitions  including every modern summer olympics.   == science ==  swimming relies on the nearly neutral buoyancy of the human body. on average  the body has a relative density of 0.98 compared to water  which causes the body to float. however  buoyancy varies on the basis of body composition  lung inflation  and the salinity of the water. higher levels of body fat and saltier water both lower the relative density of the body and increase its buoyancy. since the human body is only slightly less dense than water  water supports the weight of the body during swimming. as a result  swimming is “low-impact” compared to land activities such as running. the density and viscosity of water also create resistance for objects moving through the water. swimming strokes use this resistance to create propulsion  but this same resistance also generates drag on the body. hydrodynamics is important to stroke technique for swimming faster  and swimmers who want to swim faster or exhaust less try to reduce the drag of the body s motion through the water. to be more hydrodynamic  swimmers can either increase the power of their strokes or reduce water resistance  though power must increase by a factor of three to achieve the same effect as reducing resistance. efficient swimming by reducing water resistance involves a horizontal water position  rolling the body to reduce the breadth of the body in the water  and extending the arms as far as possible to reduce wave resistance.just before plunging into the pool  swimmers may perform exercises such as squatting. squatting helps in enhancing a swimmer’s start by warming up the thigh muscles.   == infant swimming ==  human babies demonstrate an innate swimming or diving reflex from newborn until the age of approximately 6 months. other mammals also demonstrate this phenomenon (see mammalian diving reflex).  the diving response involves apnea  reflex bradycardia  and peripheral vasoconstriction  in other words  babies immersed in water spontaneously hold their breath  slow their heart rate  and reduce blood circulation to the extremities (fingers and toes). because infants are innately able to swim  classes for babies of about 6 months old are offered in many locations. this helps build muscle memory and makes strong swimmers from a young age.   == technique ==  swimming can be undertaken using a wide range of
styles  known as  strokes  and these strokes are used for different purposes  or to distinguish between classes in competitive swimming.  it is not necessary to use a defined stroke for propulsion through the water  and untrained swimmers may use a  doggy paddle  of arm and leg movements  similar to the way four-legged animals swim. there are four main strokes used in competition and recreation swimming  the front crawl  also known as freestyle  the breaststroke  the backstroke and the butterfly.  competitive swimming in europe started around 1800  mostly using the breaststroke. in 1873  john arthur trudgen introduced the trudgen to western swimming competitions.  the butterfly stroke developed in the 1930s  and was considered a variant of the breaststroke until accepted as a separate style in 1953. butterfly is considered the hardest stroke by many people  but it is the most effective for all-around toning and the building of muscles. it also burns the most calories.other strokes exist for specific purposes  such as training or rescue  and it is also possible to adapt strokes to avoid using parts of the body  either to isolate certain body parts  such as swimming with arms only or legs only to train them harder  or for use by amputees or those affected by paralysis.   == history ==  swimming has been recorded since prehistoric times  and the earliest records of swimming date back to stone age paintings from around 7 000 years ago. written references date from 2000 bc.  some of the earliest references include the epic of gilgamesh  the iliad  the odyssey  the bible (ezekiel 47 5  acts 27 42  isaiah 25 11)  beowulf  and other sagas. the coastal tribes living in the volatile low countries were known as excellent swimmers by the romans. men and horses of the batavi tribe could cross the rhine without losing formation  according to tacitus. dio cassius describes one surprise tactic employed by aulus plautius against the celts at the battle of the medway  the [british celts] thought that romans would not be able to cross it without a bridge  and consequently bivouacked in rather careless fashion on the opposite bank  but he sent across a detachment of [batavii]  who were accustomed to swim easily in full armour across the most turbulent streams. . . . thence the britons retired to the river thames at a point near where it empties into the ocean and at flood-tide forms a lake. this they easily crossed because they knew where the firm ground and the easy passages in this region were to be found  but the romans in attempting to follow them were not so successful. however  the [batavii] swam across again and some others got over by a bridge a little way up-stream  after which they assailed the barbarians from several sides at once and cut down many of
them.  in 1538  nikolaus wynmann  a swiss–german professor of languages  wrote the earliest known complete book about swimming  colymbetes  sive de arte natandi dialogus et festivus et iucundus lectu (the swimmer  or a dialogue on the art of swimming and joyful and pleasant to read).   == purpose == there are many reasons why people swim  from swimming as a recreational pursuit to swimming as a necessary part of a job or other activity. swimming may also be used to rehabilitate injuries  especially various cardiovascular and muscle injuries.   === recreation ===  many swimmers swim for recreation  with swimming consistently ranking as one of the physical activities people are most likely to take part in.  recreational swimming can also be used for exercise  relaxation or rehabilitation.  the support of the water  and the reduction in impact  make swimming accessible for people who are unable to undertake activities such as running.   === health ===  swimming is primarily a cardiovascular/aerobic exercise due to the long exercise time  requiring a constant oxygen supply to the muscles  except for short sprints where the muscles work anaerobically. furthermore  swimming can help tone and strengthen muscles. swimming allows sufferers of arthritis to exercise affected joints without worsening their symptoms. as with most aerobic exercise  swimming reduces the harmful effects of stress. swimming is also effective in improving health for people with cardiovascular problems and chronic illnesses. it is proven to positively impact the mental health of pregnant women and mothers. swimming can even improve mood.   ==== disabled swimmers ==== as of 2013  the americans with disabilities act requires that swimming pools in the united states be accessible to disabled swimmers.   ==== elderly swimmers ====  water-based exercise can benefit older adults by improving quality of life and decreasing disability. it also improves or maintains the bone health of post-menopausal women.    === sport ===  swimming as a sport predominantly involves participants competing to be the fastest over a given distance in a certain period of time.  competitors swim different distances in different levels of competition. for example  swimming has been an olympic sport since 1896  and the current program includes events from 50 m to 1500 m in length  across all four main strokes and medley. the sport is governed internationally by the fédération internationale de natation (fina)  and competition pools for fina events are 25 or 50 meters in length. in the united states  a pool 25 yards in length is commonly used for competition. other swimming and water-related sporting disciplines include open water swimming  diving  synchronized swimming  water polo  triathlon  and the modern pentathlon.   === occupation === some occupations require workers to swim  such as abalone and pearl diving  and spearfishing. swimming is used to rescue people in the water who are in distress  including exhausted swimmers
 non-swimmers who have accidentally entered the water  and others who have come to harm on the water.  lifeguards or volunteer lifesavers are deployed at many pools and beaches worldwide to fulfill this purpose  and they  as well as rescue swimmers  may use specific swimming styles for rescue purposes. swimming is also used in marine biology to observe plants and animals in their natural habitat. other sciences use swimming  for example  konrad lorenz swam with geese as part of his studies of animal behavior. swimming also has military purposes. military swimming is usually done by special operation forces  such as navy seals and us army special forces. swimming is used to approach a location  gather intelligence  engage in sabotage or combat  and subsequently depart. this may also include airborne insertion into water or exiting a submarine while it is submerged. due to regular exposure to large bodies of water  all recruits in the united states navy  marine corps  and coast guard are required to complete basic swimming or water survival training. swimming is also a professional sport. companies sponsor swimmers who have the skills to compete at the international level. many swimmers compete competitively to represent their home countries in the olympics. professional swimmers may also earn a living as entertainers  performing in water ballets.   === locomotion === locomotion by swimming over brief distances is frequent when alternatives are precluded. there have been cases of political refugees swimming in the baltic sea and of people jumping in the water and swimming ashore from vessels not intended to reach land where they planned to go.   == risks ==  there are many risks associated with voluntary or involuntary human presence in water  which may result in death directly or through drowning asphyxiation. swimming is both the goal of much voluntary presence and the prime means of regaining land in accidental situations. most recorded water deaths fall into these categories   panic occurs when an inexperienced swimmer or a nonswimmer becomes mentally overwhelmed by the circumstances of their immersion  leading to sinking and drowning. occasionally  panic kills through hyperventilation  even in shallow water. exhaustion can make a person unable to sustain efforts to swim or tread water  often leading to death through drowning. an adult with fully developed and extended lungs has generally positive or at least neutral buoyancy  and can float with modest effort when calm and in still water. a small child has negative buoyancy and must make a sustained effort to avoid sinking rapidly. hypothermia  in which a person loses critical core temperature  can lead to unconsciousness or heart failure. dehydration from prolonged exposure to hypertonic salt water—or  less frequently  salt water aspiration syndrome where inhaled salt water creates foam in the lungs that restricts breathing—can cause loss of physical control or kill directly without actual drowning. hypothermia and dehydration also kill directly  without causing drowning  even when the
person wears a life vest. blunt trauma in a fast moving flood or river water can kill a swimmer outright  or lead to their drowning.adverse effects of swimming can include   exostosis  an abnormal bony overgrowth narrowing the ear canal due to frequent  long-term splashing or filling of cold water into the ear canal  also known as surfer s ear infection from water-borne bacteria  viruses  or parasites chlorine inhalation (in swimming pools) heart attacks while swimming (the primary cause of sudden death among triathlon participants  occurring at the rate of 1 to 2 per 100 000 participations.) adverse encounters with aquatic life  stings from sea lice  jellyfish  fish  seashells  and some species of coral puncture wounds caused by crabs  lobsters  sea urchins  zebra mussels  stingrays  flying fish  sea birds  and debris hemorrhaging bites from fish  marine mammals  and marine reptiles  occasionally resulting from predation venomous bites from sea snakes and certain species of octopus electrocution or mild shock from electric eels and electric raysaround any pool area  safety equipment is often important  and is a zoning requirement for most residential pools in the united states. supervision by personnel trained in rescue techniques is required at most competitive swimming meets and public pools.   == lessons ==  traditionally  children were considered not able to swim independently until 4 years of age  although now infant swimming lessons are recommended to prevent drowning.in sweden  denmark  norway  estonia and finland  the curriculum for the fifth grade (fourth grade in estonia) states that all children should learn how to swim as well as how to handle emergencies near water. most commonly  children are expected to be able to swim 200 metres (660 ft)—of which at least 50 metres (160 ft) on their back – after first falling into deep water and getting their head under water. even though about 95 percent of swedish school children know how to swim  drowning remains the third most common cause of death among children.in both the netherlands and belgium swimming lessons under school time (schoolzwemmen  school swimming) are supported by the government. most schools provide swimming lessons. there is a long tradition of swimming lessons in the netherlands and belgium  the dutch translation for the breaststroke swimming style is even schoolslag (schoolstroke). in france  swimming is a compulsory part of the curriculum for primary schools. children usually spend one semester per year learning swimming during cp/ce1/ce2/cm1 (1st  2nd  3rd and 4th grade). in many places  swimming lessons are provided by local swimming pools  both those run by the local authority and by private leisure companies. many schools also include swimming lessons into their physical education curricula  provided either in the schools  own pool or in the nearest public pool. in the uk  the  top-ups scheme  calls for school children who cannot swim by the
age of 11 to receive intensive daily lessons. children who have not reached great britain s national curriculum standard of swimming 25 meters by the time they leave primary school receive a half-hour lesson every day for two weeks during term-time.in canada and mexico there has been a call to include swimming in public school curriculum.in the united states there is the infant swimming resource (isr) initiative that provides lessons for infant children  to cope with an emergency where they have fallen into the water. they are taught how to roll-back-to-float (hold their breath underwater  to roll onto their back  to float unassisted  rest and breathe until help arrives). in switzerland  swimming lessons for babies are popular  to help them getting used to be in another element. at the competition level  unlike in other countries - such as the commonwealth countries  swimming teams are not related to educational institutions (high-schools and universities)  but rather to cities or regions.    == clothing and equipment ==   === swimsuits ===  standard everyday clothing is usually impractical for swimming and is unsafe under some circumstances. most cultures today expect swimmers to wear swimsuits. men s swimsuits commonly resemble shorts  or briefs. casual men s swimsuits (for example  boardshorts) are rarely skintight  unlike competitive swimwear  like jammers or diveskins. in most cases  boys and men swim with their upper body exposed  except in countries where custom or law prohibits it in a public setting  or for practical reasons such as sun protection. modern women s swimsuits are generally skintight  covering the pubic region and the breasts (see bikini). women s swimwear may also cover the midriff as well. women s swimwear is often a fashion statement  and whether it is modest or not is a subject of debate by many groups  religious and secular. competitive swimwear is built so that the wearer can swim faster and more efficiently. modern competitive swimwear is skintight and lightweight. there are many kinds of competitive swimwear for each gender. it is used in aquatic competitions  such as water polo  swim racing  diving  and rowing. wetsuits provide both thermal insulation and flotation. many swimmers lack buoyancy in the leg. the wetsuit reduces density and therefore improves buoyancy while swimming. it provides insulation by absorbing some of the surrounding water  which then heats up when in direct contact with skin. the wetsuit is the usual choice for those who swim in cold water for long periods of time  as it reduces susceptibility to hypothermia. some people also choose to wear no clothing while swimming  this is known as skinny dipping. it was common for males to swim naked in a public setting up to the early 20th century. today  skinny dipping can be a rebellious activity or merely a casual one.   === accessories === ear plugs can prevent water from getting in the ears. noseclips can prevent water from
getting in the nose. however  this is generally only used for synchronized swimming. using nose clips in competitive swimming can cause a disadvantage to most swimmers. it is for this reason that nose clips are only used for synchronized swimming and recreational swimming. goggles protect the eyes from chlorinated water  and can improve underwater visibility. tinted goggles protect the eyes from sunlight that reflects from the bottom of the pool. swim caps keep the body streamlined and protect the hair from chlorinated water. kickboards are used to keep the upper body afloat while exercising the lower body. pull buoys are used to keep the lower body afloat while exercising the upper body. swimfins are used to elongate the kick and improve technique and speed. fins also build upper calf muscles. hand paddles are used to increase resistance during arm movements  with the goal of improving technique and power. snorkels are used to help improve and maintain a good head position in the water. pool noodles are used to keep the user afloat during the time in the water. safety fencing and equipment is mandatory at public pools and a zoning requirement at most residential pools in the united states.   == see also ==   == references ==   == bibliography == cox  lynne (2005). swimming to antarctica  tales of a long-distance swimmer. harvest books. isbn 978-0-15-603130-1. maniscalco f.  il nuoto nel mondo greco romano  naples 1993. mehl h.  antike schwimmkunst  munchen 1927. schuster g.  smits w. & ullal j.  thinkers of the jungle. tandem verlag 2008. sprawson  charles (2000). haunts of the black masseur - the swimmer as hero. university of minnesota press. isbn 978-0-8166-3539-9.svin tarpinian  steve (1996). the essential swimmer. the lyons press. isbn 978-1-55821-386-9.   == external links ==  media related to swimming at wikimedia commons swimmingstrokes.info  overview of 150 historical and less known swimming-strokes
a football player or footballer is a sport person who plays one of the different types of football. the main types of football are association football  american football  canadian football  australian rules football  gaelic football  rugby league and rugby union. it has been estimated that there are 250 million association football players in the world  and many play the other forms of football.   == career == jean-pierre papin has described football as a  universal language . footballers across the world and at almost any level may regularly attract large crowds of spectators  and players are the focal points of widespread social phenomena such as association football culture. footballers generally begin as amateurs and the best players progress to become professional players. normally they start at a youth team (any local team) and from there  based on skill and talent  scouts offer contracts. once signed  some learn to play better football and a few advance to the senior or professional teams.   === wages === wages in some top men s leagues are significantly higher than other jobs. players in the premier league earn average wages of about $1 million per year. in the wealthiest clubs in european football leagues  some players earn an average wage up to $6 to $8 million per year. the best players of those clubs can earn up to $70 million per year.however  only a fraction of men s professional football  players are paid at this level. wages may be much more moderate in other divisions and leagues  and a significant number of players are semi-professional. for example  the average annual salary for footballers in  major league soccer (which started in 2009) for the 2013 season was $148 693  with significant variations depending on player position (goalkeepers for example earned $85 296  whereas forwards earned $251 805).  popularity and average salaries in women s leagues are far lower. for example  players in the national women s soccer league (nwsl) (which started in 2012) earn $15 000 to $40 000 per year as of january 2017.   === post-retirement ===  a minority of retired footballers continue working full-time within football  for instance as football managers. a 1979 study reported that former first-team ballplayers were over-represented as top ranking executives in their companies and had greater income mobility than second teamers and reserves. however  some experience chronic health issues  see below.   == skills ==   == psychological aspects of performance == research shows that association football players that take less than 200ms after the referee blows their whistle for a penalty kick are significantly more likely to miss scoring than those that take over a second.   == health issues ==  an irish 2002 study of association and gaelic football players characterised players as  lean and muscular with a reasonably high level of capacity in all areas of physical performance . the opposite is the
case for american football  where obesity could be the cause of grave health problems.a 2000 study documented injuries sustained by czech [association] football players at all levels  trauma was the cause of 81.5% of the injuries and overuse was the cause of 18.5%. joint sprains predominated (30%)  followed by fractures (16%)  muscle strains (15%)  ligament ruptures (12%)  meniscal tears and contusions (8%)  and other injuries. injuries to the knee were most prevalent (29%)  followed by injuries to the ankle (19%) and spine (9%). more injuries occurred during games (59%) than in practice. patellar tendinitis (knee pain) is considered an overused injury that also happens to other athletes of virtually every sport. it is a common problem that football players develop and can usually be treated by a quadriceps strengthening program. jumping activities place particularly high strains on the tendon and with repetitive jumping  tearing and injury of the tendon can occur. the chronic injury and healing response results in inflammation and localized pain.although levels of depression and pain in retired football players are on par with the societal average  some players suffer from post-retirement chronic injuries. head injuries are a particular concern.   === life expectancy === the average life expectancy or lifespan of an american football nfl player has been reported to be extremely low  only 53 to 59 years depending on playing position. however  a 2012 study reported that retired nfl players have a lower death rate than men in the general population. an oft-cited life expectancy of 58 years has been claimed by sports illustrated to be based on a myth. according to a 2007 study  which also claims that little supporting data is available  retired american football players had  long and fulfilling careers with no apparent long-term detrimental effects on physical or mental health scores despite a high prevalence of arthritis . one explanation is that  life expectancy  is ambiguous  it may in some contexts refer to the expected age of death of a player  and in other contexts to the expected remaining number of life years. as for association football  a 2011 german study found that german national team players live 1.9 years less than the general male population. football players participating in international matches for germany have reduced longevity compared to the general population. this disadvantage was the larger  the earlier the international football player started his international career. this finding is in line with the current knowledge of life expectancy in major athletes  especially those from other team sports  a 1983 study of rugby players found that the life expectancy of all blacks is the same as for the general population.   === head ===  american football players are prone to head injuries such as concussion. in later life  this increases the risk of dementia and alzheimer s. professional american football players self-reporting concussions are at greater risk for having depressive episodes later in life compared with those
retired players self-reporting no concussions.probably due to the repeated trauma associated with heading balls  professional association football has been suggested to increase the incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. in a 1987 study of former norwegian association football national team players  one third of the players were found to have central cerebral atrophy  i.e. brain damage. a 1999 study connected soccer to chronic traumatic head injury (cthi)  [p]articipation in amateur association football in general and concussion specifically is associated with impaired performance in memory and planning functions. due to the worldwide popularity of soccer  these observations may have important public health implications   === knee === anterior cruciate ligaments are particularly vulnerable in most types of football due to injuries that can be sustained during tackles.   === hip === an increased incidence of osteoarthritis in the hip joint has been found in retired football players.   === muscles === a 2012 study of association football injuries found that 19% of all injuries were muscle injuries  of which 54% affected the thigh muscles.   === sleep and psychological functioning === in a 2009 study  association football was found to be associated with favourable sleep patterns and psychological functioning in adolescent male football players.the rate of suicide among nfl vets has been found to be 59% lower than in the general population.   === fifa response === in 2012  fifa released a paper intended to identify key risk factors for association football players.   == lists of players == lists of association football players list of american football players  list of footballers (gaelic football) category lists of rugby league footballers   == see also == sports unions   == references ==
tennis is a racket sport that can be played individually against a single opponent (singles) or between two teams of two players each (doubles). each player uses a tennis racket that is strung with cord to strike a hollow rubber ball covered with felt over or around a net and into the opponent s court. the object of the game is to maneuver the ball in such a way that the opponent is not able to play a valid return. the player who is unable to return the ball will not gain a point  while the opposite player will. tennis is an olympic sport and is played at all levels of society and at all ages. the sport can be played by anyone who can hold a racket  including wheelchair users. the modern game of tennis originated in birmingham  england  in the late 19th century as lawn tennis. it had close connections both to various field (lawn) games such as croquet and bowls as well as to the older racket sport today called real tennis. during most of the 19th century  in fact  the term tennis referred to real tennis  not lawn tennis. the rules of modern tennis have changed little since the 1890s. two exceptions are that from 1908 to 1961 the server had to keep one foot on the ground at all times  and the adoption of the tiebreak in the 1970s. a recent addition to professional tennis has been the adoption of electronic review technology coupled with a point-challenge system  which allows a player to contest the line call of a point  a system known as hawk-eye. tennis is played by millions of recreational players and is also a popular worldwide spectator sport. the four grand slam tournaments (also referred to as the majors) are especially popular  the australian open played on hard courts  the french open played on red clay courts  wimbledon played on grass courts  and the us open also played on hard courts.   == history ==   === predecessors ===  historians believe that the game s ancient origin lay in 12th century northern france  where a ball was struck with the palm of the hand. louis x of france was a keen player of jeu de paume ( game of the palm )  which evolved into real tennis  and became notable as the first person to construct indoor tennis courts in the modern style. louis was unhappy with playing tennis outdoors and accordingly had indoor  enclosed courts made in paris  around the end of the 13th century . in due course this design spread across royal palaces all over europe. in june 1316 at vincennes  val-de-marne and following a particularly exhausting game  louis drank a large quantity of cooled wine and subsequently died of either pneumonia or pleurisy  although there was also suspicion of poisoning. because of the contemporary accounts of his death  louis x is history s first
tennis player known by name. another of the early enthusiasts of the game was king charles v of france  who had a court set up at the louvre palace.it was not until the 16th century that rackets came into use and the game began to be called  tennis  from the french term tenez  which can be translated as  hold   receive  or  take  an interjection used as a call from the server to his opponent. it was popular in england and france  although the game was only played indoors where the ball could be hit off the wall. henry viii of england was a big fan of this game  which is now known as real tennis. during the 18th and early 19th centuries  as real tennis declined  new racket sports emerged in england.the invention of the first lawn mower in 1830  in britain  is believed to have been a catalyst  for the preparation of modern-style grass courts  sporting ovals  playing fields  pitches  greens  etc. this in turn led to the codification of modern rules for many sports  including lawn tennis  most football codes  lawn bowls and others.   === origins of the modern game ===  between 1859 and 1865 harry gem  a solicitor and his friend augurio perera developed a game that combined elements of racquets and the basque ball game pelota  which they played on perera s croquet lawn in birmingham in england. in 1872  along with two local doctors  they founded the world s first tennis club on avenue road  leamington spa. this is where  lawn tennis  was used as a name of activity by a club for the first time. after leamington  the second club to take up the game of lawn tennis appears to have been the edgbaston archery and croquet society  also in birmingham. in tennis  a cultural history  heiner gillmeister reveals that on december 8  1874  british army officer walter clopton wingfield wrote to harry gem  commenting that he (wingfield) had been experimenting with his version of lawn tennis “for a year and a half”. in december 1873  wingfield designed and patented a game which he called sphairistikè (greek  σφαιριστική  meaning  ball-playing )  and was soon known simply as  sticky  – for the amusement of guests at a garden party on his friend s estate of nantclwyd hall  in llanelidan  wales. according to r. d. c. evans  turfgrass agronomist   sports historians all agree that [wingfield] deserves much of the credit for the development of modern tennis.  according to honor godfrey  museum curator at wimbledon  wingfield  popularized this game enormously. he produced a boxed set which included a net  poles  rackets  balls for playing the game – and most importantly you had his rules. he was absolutely terrific
at marketing and he sent his game all over the world. he had very good connections with the clergy  the law profession  and the aristocracy and he sent thousands of sets out in the first year or so  in 1874.  the world s oldest annual tennis tournament took place at leamington lawn tennis club in birmingham in 1874. this was three years before the all england lawn tennis and croquet club would hold its first championships at wimbledon  in 1877. the first championships culminated in a significant debate on how to standardise the rules.  in the u.s. in 1874 mary ewing outerbridge  a young socialite  returned from bermuda with a sphairistikè set. she became fascinated by the game of tennis after watching british army officers play. she laid out a tennis court at the staten island cricket club at camp washington  tompkinsville  staten island  new york. the first american national championship was played there in september 1880. an englishman named o.e. woodhouse won the singles title  and a silver cup worth $100  by defeating canadian i. f. hellmuth. there was also a doubles match which was won by a local pair. there were different rules at each club. the ball in boston was larger than the one normally used in new york. on 21 may 1881  the oldest nationwide tennis organization in the world was formed  the united states national lawn tennis association (now the united states tennis association) in order to standardize the rules and organize competitions. the u.s. national men s singles championship  now the us open  was first held in 1881 at the newport casino  newport  rhode island. the u.s. national women s singles championships were first held in 1887 in philadelphia.  tennis also became popular in france  where the french championships dates to 1891 although until 1925 it was open only to tennis players who were members of french clubs. thus  wimbledon  the us open  the french open  and the australian open (dating to 1905) became and have remained the most prestigious events in tennis. together these four events are called the majors or slams (a term borrowed from bridge rather than baseball).  in 1913  the international lawn tennis federation (iltf)  now the international tennis federation (itf)  was founded and established three official tournaments as the major championships of the day. the world grass court championships were awarded to great britain.  the world hard court championships were awarded to france  the term  hard court  was used for clay courts at the time. some tournaments were held in belgium instead. and the world covered court championships for indoor courts was awarded annually  sweden  france  great britain  denmark  switzerland and spain each hosted the tournament. at a meeting held on 16 march 1923 in paris  the title  world championship  was dropped and a new category of official championship was
created for events in great britain  france  the united states  and australia – today s grand slam events. the impact on the four recipient nations to replace the ‘world championships’ with ‘official championships’ was simple in a general sense  each became a major nation of the federation with enhanced voting power and each now operated a major event.the comprehensive rules promulgated in 1924 by the iltf  have remained largely stable in the ensuing eighty years  the one major change being the addition of the tiebreak system designed by jimmy van alen. that same year  tennis withdrew from the olympics after the 1924 games but returned 60 years later as a 21-and-under demonstration event in 1984. this reinstatement was credited by the efforts by the then itf president philippe chatrier  itf general secretary david gray and itf vice president pablo llorens  and support from ioc president juan antonio samaranch. the success of the event was overwhelming and the ioc decided to reintroduce tennis as a full medal sport at seoul in 1988.  the davis cup  an annual competition between men s national teams  dates to 1900. the analogous competition for women s national teams  the fed cup  was founded as the federation cup in 1963 to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the founding of the itf.in 1926  promoter c. c. pyle established the first professional tennis tour with a group of american and french tennis players playing exhibition matches to paying audiences. the most notable of these early professionals were the american vinnie richards and the frenchwoman suzanne lenglen. once a player turned pro he or she was no longer permitted to compete in the major (amateur) tournaments.in 1968  commercial pressures and rumors of some amateurs taking money under the table led to the abandonment of this distinction  inaugurating the open era  in which all players could compete in all tournaments  and top players were able to make their living from tennis. with the beginning of the open era  the establishment of an international professional tennis circuit  and revenues from the sale of television rights  tennis s popularity has spread worldwide  and the sport has shed its middle-class english-speaking image (although it is acknowledged that this stereotype still exists).in 1954  van alen founded the international tennis hall of fame  a non-profit museum in newport  rhode island. the building contains a large collection of tennis memorabilia as well as a hall of fame honouring prominent members and tennis players from all over the world. each year  a grass court tournament and an induction ceremony honoring new hall of fame members are hosted on its grounds.   == equipment ==  part of the appeal of tennis stems from the simplicity of equipment required for play. beginners need only a racket and balls.   === rackets ===  the components of a tennis racket include a handle  known as the grip  connected to a
neck which joins a roughly elliptical frame that holds a matrix of tightly pulled strings. for the first 100 years of the modern game  rackets were made of wood and of standard size  and strings were of animal gut. laminated wood construction yielded more strength in rackets used through most of the 20th century until first metal and then composites of carbon graphite  ceramics  and lighter metals such as titanium were introduced. these stronger materials enabled the production of oversized rackets that yielded yet more power. meanwhile  technology led to the use of synthetic strings that match the feel of gut yet with added durability.  under modern rules of tennis  the rackets must adhere to the following guidelines  the hitting area  composed of the strings  must be flat and generally uniform. the frame of the hitting area may not be more than 29 inches (74 cm) in length and 12.5 inches (32 cm) in width. the entire racket must be of a fixed shape  size  weight  and weight distribution. there may not be any energy source built into the rackets. the rackets must not provide any kind of communication  instruction or advice to the player during the match.the rules regarding rackets have changed over time  as material and engineering advances have been made. for example  the maximum length of the frame had been 32 inches (81 cm) until 1997  when it was shortened to 29 inches (74 cm).many companies manufacture and distribute tennis rackets. wilson  head and babolat are some of the more commonly used brands  however  many more companies exist. the same companies sponsor players to use these rackets in the hopes that the company name will become more well known by the public.   === balls ===  tennis balls were originally made of cloth strips stitched together with thread and stuffed with feathers. modern tennis balls are made of hollow vulcanized rubber with a felt coating. traditionally white  the predominant colour was gradually changed to optic yellow in the latter part of the 20th century to allow for improved visibility. tennis balls must conform to certain criteria for size  weight  deformation  and bounce to be approved for regulation play. the international tennis federation (itf) defines the official diameter as 65.41–68.58 mm (2.575–2.700 in). balls must weigh between 56.0 and 59.4 g (1.98 and 2.10 oz). tennis balls were traditionally manufactured in the united states and europe. although the process of producing the balls has remained virtually unchanged for the past 100 years  the majority of manufacturing now takes place in the far east. the relocation is due to cheaper labour costs and materials in the region. tournaments that are played under the itf rules of tennis must use balls that are approved by the international tennis federation (itf) and be named on the official itf list of approved tennis balls.   === miscellaneous === advanced players improve their performance through a number
of accoutrements. vibration dampeners may be interlaced in the proximal part of the string array for improved feel. racket handles may be customized with absorbent or rubber-like materials to improve the players  grip. players often use sweat bands on their wrists to keep their hands dry and head bands or bandanas to keep the sweat out of their eyes as well. finally  although the game can be played in a variety of shoes  specialized tennis shoes have wide  flat soles for stability and a built-up front structure to avoid excess wear.   == manner of play ==   === court ===  tennis is played on a rectangular  flat surface. the court is 78 feet (23.77 m) long  and 27 feet (8.2 m) wide for singles matches and 36 ft (11 m) for doubles matches. additional clear space around the court is required in order for players to reach overrun balls. a net is stretched across the full width of the court  parallel with the baselines  dividing it into two equal ends. it is held up by either a cord or metal cable of diameter no greater than 0.8 cm (1⁄3 in). the net is 3 feet 6 inches (1.07 m) high at the posts and 3 feet (0.91 m) high in the center. the net posts are 3 feet (0.91 m) outside the doubles court on each side or  for a singles net  3 feet (0.91 m) outside the singles court on each side. the modern tennis court owes its design to major walter clopton wingfield. in 1873  wingfield patented a court much the same as the current one for his stické tennis (sphairistike). this template was modified in 1875 to the court design that exists today  with markings similar to wingfield s version  but with the hourglass shape of his court changed to a rectangle.tennis is unusual in that it is played on a variety of surfaces. grass  clay  and hardcourts of concrete or asphalt topped with acrylic are the most common. occasionally carpet is used for indoor play  with hardwood flooring having been historically used. artificial turf courts can also be found.   ==== lines ==== the lines that delineate the width of the court are called the baseline (farthest back) and the service line (middle of the court). the short mark in the center of each baseline is referred to as either the hash mark or the center mark. the outermost lines that make up the length are called the doubles sidelines  they are the boundaries for doubles matches. the lines to the inside of the doubles sidelines are the singles sidelines  and are the boundaries in singles play. the area between a doubles sideline and the nearest singles sideline is called the doubles alley  playable in doubles play. the line that runs across the center of a player s side of the court is called the service line because the serve must be delivered into
the area between the service line and the net on the receiving side. despite its name  this is not where a player legally stands when making a serve.the line dividing the service line in two is called the center line or center service line. the boxes this center line creates are called the service boxes  depending on a player s position  they have to hit the ball into one of these when serving. a ball is out only if none of it has hit the area inside the lines  or the line  upon its first bounce. all lines are required to be between 1 and 2 inches (25 and 51 mm) in width  with the exception of the baseline which can be up to 4 inches (100 mm) wide  although in practice it is often the same width as the others.   === play of a single point ===  the players or teams start on opposite sides of the net. one player is designated the server  and the opposing player is the receiver. the choice to be server or receiver in the first game and the choice of ends is decided by a coin toss before the warm-up starts. service alternates game by game between the two players or teams. for each point  the server starts behind the baseline  between the center mark and the sideline. the receiver may start anywhere on their side of the net. when the receiver is ready  the server will serve  although the receiver must play to the pace of the server. for a service to be legal  the ball must travel over the net without touching it into the diagonally opposite service box. if the ball hits the net but lands in the service box  this is a let or net service  which is void  and the server retakes that serve. the player can serve any number of let services in a point and they are always treated as voids and not as faults. a fault is a serve that falls long or wide of the service box  or does not clear the net. there is also a  foot fault  when a player s foot touches the baseline or an extension of the center mark before the ball is hit. if the second service  after a fault  is also a fault  the server double faults  and the receiver wins the point. however  if the serve is in  it is considered a legal service. a legal service starts a rally  in which the players alternate hitting the ball across the net. a legal return consists of a player hitting the ball so that it falls in the server s court  before it has bounced twice or hit any fixtures except the net. a player or team cannot hit the ball twice in a row. the ball must travel over the net into the other players  court. a
ball that hits the net during a rally is considered a legal return as long as it crosses into the opposite side of the court. the first player or team to fail to make a legal return loses the point. the server then moves to the other side of the service line at the start of a new point.   === scoring ===   ==== game  set  match ====   ===== game ===== a game consists of a sequence of points played with the same player serving. a game is won by the first player to have won at least four points in total and at least two points more than the opponent. the running score of each game is described in a manner peculiar to tennis  scores from zero to three points are described as  love   15   30  and  40  respectively. if at least three points have been scored by each player  making the player s scores equal at 40 apiece  the score is not called out as  40–40  but rather as  deuce . if at least three points have been scored by each side and a player has one more point than his opponent  the score of the game is  advantage  for the player in the lead. during informal games   advantage  can also be called  ad in  or  van in  when the serving player is ahead  and  ad out  or  van out  when the receiving player is ahead.  the score of a tennis game during play is always read with the serving player s score first. in tournament play  the chair umpire calls the point count (e.g.   15-love ) after each point. at the end of a game  the chair umpire also announces the winner of the game and the overall score.   ===== set ===== a set consists of a sequence of games played with service alternating between games  ending when the count of games won meets certain criteria. typically  a player wins a set by winning at least six games and at least two games more than the opponent. if one player has won six games and the opponent five  an additional game is played. if the leading player wins that game  the player wins the set 7–5. if the trailing player wins the game (tying the set 6–6) a tie-break is played. a tie-break  played under a separate set of rules  allows one player to win one more game and thus the set  to give a final set score of 7–6. a  love  set means that the loser of the set won zero games  colloquially termed a  jam donut  in the us. in tournament play  the chair umpire announces the winner of the set and the overall score. the final score in sets is
always read with the winning player s score first  e.g.  6–2  4–6  6–0  7–5 .   ===== match ===== a match consists of a sequence of sets. the outcome is determined through a best of three or five sets system. on the professional circuit  men play best-of-five-set matches at all four grand slam tournaments  davis cup  and the final of the olympic games and best-of-three-set matches at all other tournaments  while women play best-of-three-set matches at all tournaments. the first player to win two sets in a best-of-three  or three sets in a best-of-five  wins the match. only in the final sets of matches at the australian open  the french open  wimbledon  the olympic games  davis cup (until 2015)  and fed cup are tie-breaks not played. in these cases  sets are played indefinitely until one player has a two-game lead  occasionally leading to some remarkably long matches. in tournament play  the chair umpire announces the end of the match with the well-known phrase  game  set  match  followed by the winning person s or team s name.   ==== special point terms ====   ===== game point ===== a game point occurs in tennis whenever the player who is in the lead in the game needs only one more point to win the game. the terminology is extended to sets (set point)  matches (match point)  and even championships (championship point). for example  if the player who is serving has a score of 40-love  the player has a triple game point (triple set point  etc.) as the player has three consecutive chances to win the game. game points  set points  and match points are not part of official scoring and are not announced by the chair umpire in tournament play.   ===== break point ===== a break point occurs if the receiver  not the server  has a chance to win the game with the next point. break points are of particular importance because serving is generally considered advantageous  with servers being expected to win games in which they are serving. a receiver who has one (score of 30–40 or advantage)  two (score of 15–40) or three (score of love-40) consecutive chances to win the game has break point  double break point or triple break point  respectively. if the receiver does  in fact  win their break point  the game is awarded to the receiver  and the receiver is said to have converted their break point. if the receiver fails to win their break point it is called a failure to convert. winning break points  and thus the game  is also referred to as breaking serve  as the receiver has disrupted  or broken the natural advantage of the server. if in the following game the previous server also wins a break point it is referred to as breaking
back. except where tie-breaks apply  at least one break of serve is required to win a set.   === rule variations ===  no adfrom  no advantage . scoring method created by jimmy van alen. the first player or doubles team to win four points wins the game  regardless of whether the player or team is ahead by two points. when the game score reaches three points each  the receiver chooses which side of the court (advantage court or deuce court) the service is to be delivered on the seventh and game-deciding point. utilized by world team tennis professional competition  atp tours  wta tours  itf pro doubles and itf junior doubles.pro setinstead of playing multiple sets  players may play one  pro set . a pro set is first to 8 (or 10) games by a margin of two games  instead of first to 6 games. a 12-point tie-break is usually played when the score is 8–8 (or 10–10). these are often played with no-ad scoring.match tie-breakthis is sometimes played instead of a third set. a match tie-break (also called super tie-break) is played like a regular tie-break  but the winner must win ten points instead of seven. match tie-breaks are used in the hopman cup  grand slams (excluding wimbledon) and the olympic games for mixed doubles  on the atp (since 2006)  wta (since 2007) and itf (excluding four grand slam tournaments and the davis cup) tours for doubles and as a player s choice in usta league play.fast4fast4 is a shortened format that offers a  fast  alternative  with four points  four games and four rules  there are no advantage scores  lets are played  tie-breakers apply at three games all and the first to four games wins the set.another  however informal  tennis format is called canadian doubles. this involves three players  with one person playing a doubles team. the single player gets to utilize the alleys normally reserved only for a doubles team. conversely  the doubles team does not use the alleys when executing a shot. the scoring is the same as a regular game. this format is not sanctioned by any official body.  australian doubles  another informal and unsanctioned form of tennis  is played with similar rules to the canadian doubles style  only in this version  players rotate court position after each game. as such  each player plays doubles and singles over the course of a match  with the singles player always serving. scoring styles vary  but one popular method is to assign a value of 2 points to each game  with the server taking both points if he or she holds serve and the doubles team each taking one if they break serve. wheelchair tennis can be played by able-bodied players as well as people who require a wheelchair for mobility. an extra bounce is permitted. this rule makes it possible to have mixed wheelchair and
able-bodied matches. it is possible for a doubles team to consist of a wheelchair player and an able-bodied player (referred to as  one-up  one-down )  or for a wheelchair player to play against an able-bodied player. in such cases  the extra bounce is permitted for the wheelchair users only.   == officials ==  in most professional play and some amateur competition  there is an officiating head judge or chair umpire (usually referred to as the umpire)  who sits in a raised chair to one side of the court. the umpire has absolute authority to make factual determinations. the umpire may be assisted by line judges  who determine whether the ball has landed within the required part of the court and who also call foot faults. there also may be a net judge who determines whether the ball has touched the net during service. the umpire has the right to overrule a line judge or a net judge if the umpire is sure that a clear mistake has been made.in some tournaments  line judges who would be calling the serve  were assisted by electronic sensors that beeped to indicate the serve was out. this system was called  cyclops . cyclops has since largely been replaced by the hawk-eye system. in professional tournaments using this system  players are allowed three unsuccessful appeals per set  plus one additional appeal in the tie-break to challenge close line calls by means of an electronic review. the us open  miami masters  us open series  and world team tennis started using this challenge system in 2006 and the australian open and wimbledon introduced the system in 2007. in clay-court matches  such as at the french open  a call may be questioned by reference to the mark left by the ball s impact on the court surface. the referee  who is usually located off the court  is the final authority about tennis rules. when called to the court by a player or team captain  the referee may overrule the umpire s decision if the tennis rules were violated (question of law) but may not change the umpire s decision on a question of fact. if  however  the referee is on the court during play  the referee may overrule the umpire s decision. (this would only happen in davis cup or fed cup matches  not at the world group level  when a chair umpire from a non-neutral country is in the chair).ball boys and girls may be employed to retrieve balls  pass them to the players  and hand players their towels. they have no adjudicative role. in rare events (e.g.  if they are hurt or if they have caused a hindrance)  the umpire may ask them for a statement of what actually happened. the umpire may consider their statements when making a decision. in some leagues  especially junior leagues  players make their own calls  trusting each other
to be honest. this is the case for many school and university level matches. the referee or referee s assistant  however  can be called on court at a player s request  and the referee or assistant may change a player s call. in unofficiated matches  a ball is out only if the player entitled to make the call is sure that the ball is out.   == junior tennis ==  in tennis  a junior is a player under 18 who is still legally protected by a parent or guardian. players on the main adult tour who are under 18 must have documents signed by a parent or guardian. these players  however  are still eligible to play in junior tournaments. the international tennis federation (itf) conducts a junior tour that allows juniors to establish a world ranking and an association of tennis professionals (atp) or women s tennis association (wta) ranking. most juniors who enter the international circuit do so by progressing through itf  satellite  future  and challenger tournaments before entering the main circuit. the latter three circuits also have adults competing in them. some juniors  however  such as australian lleyton hewitt and frenchman gaël monfils  have catapulted directly from the junior tour to the atp tour by dominating the junior scene or by taking advantage of opportunities given to them to participate in professional tournaments. in 2004  the itf implemented a new rankings scheme to encourage greater participation in doubles  by combining two rankings (singles and doubles) into one combined tally. junior tournaments do not offer prize money except for the grand slam tournaments  which are the most prestigious junior events. juniors may earn income from tennis by participating in the future  satellite  or challenger tours. tournaments are broken up into different tiers offering different amounts of ranking points  culminating with grade a. leading juniors are allowed to participate for their nation in the junior fed cup and davis cup competitions. to succeed in tennis often means having to begin playing at a young age. to facilitate and nurture a junior s growth in tennis  almost all tennis playing nations have developed a junior development system. juniors develop their play through a range of tournaments on all surfaces  accommodating all different standards of play. talented juniors may also receive sponsorships from governing bodies or private institutions.   == match play ==   === continuity === a tennis match is intended to be continuous. because stamina is a relevant factor  arbitrary delays are not permitted. in most cases  service is required to occur no more than 20 seconds after the end of the previous point. this is increased to 90 seconds when the players change ends (after every odd-numbered game)  and a 2-minute break is permitted between sets. other than this  breaks are permitted only when forced by events beyond the players  control  such as rain  damaged footwear  damaged racket
 or the need to retrieve an errant ball. should a player be determined to be stalling repeatedly  the chair umpire may initially give a warning followed by subsequent penalties of  point   game  and default of the match for the player who is consistently taking longer than the allowed time limit.in the event of a rain delay  darkness or other external conditions halting play  the match is resumed at a later time  with the same score as at the time of the delay  and the players at the same end of the court when rain halted play  or at the same position (north or south) if play is resumed on a different court.   === ball changes === balls wear out quickly in serious play and  therefore  in atp and wta tournaments  they are changed after every nine games with the first change occurring after only seven games  because the first set of balls is also used for the pre-match warm-up. as a courtesy to the receiver  the server will often signal to the receiver before the first serve of the game in which new balls are used as a reminder that they are using new balls. however  in itf tournaments like fed cup  the balls are changed in a 9–11 style. continuity of the balls  condition is considered part of the game  so if a re-warm-up is required after an extended break in play (usually due to rain)  then the re-warm-up is done using a separate set of balls  and use of the match balls is resumed only when play resumes.   === on-court coaching === a recent rule change is to allow coaching on court on a limited basis during a match. this has been introduced in women s tennis for wta tour events in 2009 and allows the player to request her coach once per set.   == stance == stance refers to the way a player prepares themselves in order to best be able to return a shot. essentially  it enables them to move quickly in order to achieve a particular stroke. there are four main stances in modern tennis  open  semi-open  closed  and neutral. all four stances involve the player crouching in some manner  as well as being a more efficient striking posture  it allows them to isometrically preload their muscles in order to play the stroke more dynamically. what stance is selected is strongly influenced by shot selection. a player may quickly alter their stance depending on the circumstances and the type of shot they intend to play. any given stance also alters dramatically based upon the actual playing of the shot with dynamic movements and shifts of body weight occurring.   === open stance === this is the most common stance in tennis. the player’s feet are placed parallel to the net. they may be pointing sideways  directly at the net or
diagonally towards it. this stance allows for a high degree of torso rotation which can add significant power to the stroke. this process is sometimes likened to the coiling and uncoiling of a spring. i.e the torso is rotated as a means of preloading the muscular system in preparation for playing the stroke  this is the coiling phase. when the stroke is played the torso rotates to face forwards again  called uncoiling  and adds significant power to the stroke. a disadvantage of this stance is that it does not always allow ‘for proper weight transfer and maintenance of balance’ when making powerful strokes. it is commonly used for forehand strokes  double-handed backhands can also be made effectively from it.   === semi-open stance === this stance is somewhere between open and closed and is a very flexible stance. the feet are aligned diagonally towards the net. it allows for a lot of shoulder rotation and the torso can be coiled  before being uncoiled into the shot in order to increase the power of the shot. it is commonly used in modern tennis especially by ‘top professional players on the forehand’. two-handed backhands can also be employed from this stance.   === closed stance === the closed stance is the least commonly used of the three main stances. one foot is placed further towards the net with the other foot further from it  there is a diagonal alignment between the feet.  it allows for effective torso rotation in order to increase the power of the shot. it is usually used to play backhand shots and it is rare to see forehand shots played from it. a stroke from this stance may entail the rear foot coming completely off the floor with bodyweight being transferred entirely to the front foot.   === neutral stance === this is sometimes also referred to as the square stance. one foot is positioned closer to the net and ahead of the other which is  behind and in line with it. both feet are aligned at a 90 degree angle to the net. the neutral stance is often taught early because ‘it allows beginners to learn about shifting weight and rotation of the body.’ forehands and backhands may be made from it.   == shots ==  a competent tennis player has eight basic shots in his or her repertoire  the serve  forehand  backhand  volley  half-volley  overhead smash  drop shot  and lob.   === grip ===  a grip is a way of holding the racket in order to hit shots during a match. the grip affects the angle of the racket face when it hits the ball and influences the pace  spin  and placement of the shot. players use various grips during play  including the continental (the  handshake grip )  eastern (can be either semi-eastern or full eastern. usually used for backhands.)  and western (semi-western or full western  usually for
forehand grips) grips. most players change grips during a match depending on what shot they are hitting  for example  slice shots and serves call for a continental grip.   === serve ===  a serve (or  more formally  a  service ) in tennis is a shot to start a point. the serve is initiated by tossing the ball into the air and hitting it (usually near the apex of its trajectory) into the diagonally opposite service box without touching the net. the serve may be hit under- or overhand although underhand serving remains a rarity. if the ball hits the net on the first serve and bounces over into the correct diagonal box then it is called a  let  and the server gets two more additional serves to get it in. there can also be a let if the server serves the ball and the receiver isn t prepared. if the server misses his or her first serve and gets a let on the second serve  then they get one more try to get the serve in the box. experienced players strive to master the conventional overhand serve to maximize its power and placement. the server may employ different types of serve including flat serve  topspin serve  slice serve  and kick (american twist) serve. a reverse type of spin serve is hit in a manner that spins the ball opposite the natural spin of the server  the spin direction depending upon right- or left-handedness. if the ball is spinning counterclockwise  it will curve right from the hitter s point of view and curve left if spinning clockwise.some servers are content to use the serve simply to initiate the point  however  advanced players often try to hit a winning shot with their serve. a winning serve that is not touched by the opponent is called an  ace .   === forehand ===  for a right-handed player  the forehand is a stroke that begins on the right side of the body  continues across the body as contact is made with the ball  and ends on the left side of the body. there are various grips for executing the forehand  and their popularity has fluctuated over the years. the most important ones are the continental  the eastern  the semi-western  and the western. for a number of years  the small  frail 1920s player bill johnston was considered by many to have had the best forehand of all time  a stroke that he hit shoulder-high using a western grip. few top players used the western grip after the 1920s  but in the latter part of the 20th century  as shot-making techniques and equipment changed radically  the western forehand made a strong comeback and is now used by many modern players. no matter which grip is used  most forehands are generally executed with one hand holding the racket  but there have been fine players
with two-handed forehands. in the 1940s and 50s  the ecuadorian/american player pancho segura used a two-handed forehand to achieve a devastating effect against larger  more powerful players. players such as monica seles or france s fabrice santoro and marion bartoli are also notable players known for their two-handed forehands.   === backhand ===  for right-handed players  the backhand is a stroke that begins on the left side of their body  continues across their body as contact is made with the ball  and ends on the right side of their body. it can be executed with either one hand or with both and is generally considered more difficult to master than the forehand. for most of the 20th century  the backhand was performed with one hand  using either an eastern or a continental grip. the first notable players to use two hands were the 1930s australians vivian mcgrath and john bromwich  but they were lonely exceptions. the two-handed grip gained popularity in the 1970s as björn borg  chris evert  jimmy connors  and later mats wilander and marat safin used it to great effect  and it is now used by a large number of the world s best players  including rafael nadal and serena williams.two hands give the player more control  while one hand can generate a slice shot  applying backspin on the ball to produce a low trajectory bounce. reach is also limited with the two-handed shot. the player long considered to have had the best backhand of all time  don budge  had a powerful one-handed stroke in the 1930s and 1940s that imparted topspin onto the ball. ken rosewall  another player noted for his one-handed backhand  used a very accurate slice backhand through the 1950s and 1960s. a small number of players  notably monica seles  use two hands on both the backhand and forehand sides.   === other shots === a volley is a shot returned to the opponent in mid-air before the ball bounces  generally performed near the net  and is usually made with a stiff-wristed punching motion to hit the ball into an open area of the opponent s court. the half volley is made by hitting the ball on the rise just after it has bounced  also generally in the vicinity of the net  and played with the racket close to the ground. the swinging volley is hit out of the air as the player approaches the net. it is an offensive shot used to take preparation time away from the opponent  as it returns the ball into the opponent s court much faster than a standard volley. from a poor defensive position on the baseline  the lob can be used as either an offensive or defensive weapon  hitting the ball high and deep into the opponent s court to either enable the lobber to get into better defensive position or to win the point outright by hitting
it over the opponent s head. if the lob is not hit deeply enough into the other court  however  an opponent near the net may then hit an overhead smash  a hard  serve-like shot  to try to end the point. a difficult shot in tennis is the return of an attempted lob over the backhand side of a player. when the contact point is higher than the reach of a two-handed backhand  most players will try to execute a high slice (under the ball or sideways). fewer players attempt the backhand sky-hook or smash. rarely  a player will go for a high topspin backhand  while themselves in the air. a successful execution of any of these alternatives requires balance and timing  with less margin of error than the lower contact point backhands  since this shot is a break in the regular pattern of play. if an opponent is deep in his court  a player may suddenly employ an unexpected drop shot  by softly tapping the ball just over the net so that the opponent is unable to run in fast enough to retrieve it. advanced players will often apply back spin to a drop shot  causing the ball to  skid  upon landing and bounce sideways  with less forward momentum toward their opponent  or even backwards towards the net  thus making it even more difficult to return.   == injuries ==  muscle strain is one of the most common injuries in tennis. when an isolated large-energy appears during the muscle contraction and at the same time body weight apply huge amount of pressure to the lengthened muscle  muscle strain can occur. inflammation and bleeding are triggered when muscle strain occurs  which can result in redness  pain and swelling. overuse is also common in tennis players of all levels. muscle  cartilage  nerves  bursae  ligaments and tendons may be damaged from overuse. the repetitive use of a particular muscle without time for repair and recovery is the most common cause of injury.   == tournaments ==  tournaments are often organized by gender and number of players. common tournament configurations include men s singles  women s singles  and doubles  where two players play on each side of the net. tournaments may be organized for specific age groups  with upper age limits for youth and lower age limits for senior players. example of this include the orange bowl and les petits as junior tournaments. there are also tournaments for players with disabilities  such as wheelchair tennis and deaf tennis. in the four grand slam tournaments  the singles draws are limited to 128 players for each gender. most large tournaments seed players  but players may also be matched by their skill level. according to how well a person does in sanctioned play  a player is given a rating that is adjusted periodically to maintain competitive matches. for example  the united
states tennis association administers the national tennis rating program (ntrp)  which rates players between 1.0 and 7.0 in 1/2 point increments. average club players under this system would rate 3.0–4.5 while world class players would be 7.0 on this scale.   === grand slam tournaments === the four grand slam tournaments are considered to be the most prestigious tennis events in the world. they are held annually and comprise  in chronological order  the australian open  the french open  wimbledon  and the us open. apart from the olympic games  davis cup  fed cup  and hopman cup  they are the only tournaments regulated by the international tennis federation (itf). the itf s national associations  tennis australia (australian open)  the fédération française de tennis (french open)  the lawn tennis association (wimbledon) and the united states tennis association (us open) are delegated the responsibility to organize these events.aside from the historical significance of these events  they also carry larger prize funds than any other tour event and are worth double the number of ranking points to the champion than in the next echelon of tournaments  the masters 1000 (men) and premier events (women). another distinguishing feature is the number of players in the singles draw. there are 128  more than any other professional tennis tournament. this draw is composed of 32 seeded players  other players ranked in the world s top 100  qualifiers  and players who receive invitations through wild cards. grand slam men s tournaments have best-of-five set matches while the women play best-of-three. grand slam tournaments are among the small number of events that last two weeks  the others being the indian wells masters and the miami masters. currently  the grand slam tournaments are the only tour events that have mixed doubles contests. grand slam tournaments are held in conjunction with wheelchair tennis tournaments and junior tennis competitions. these tournaments also contain their own idiosyncrasies. for example  players at wimbledon are required to wear predominantly white. andre agassi chose to skip wimbledon from 1988 through 1990 citing the event s traditionalism  particularly its  predominantly white  dress code. wimbledon has its own particular methods for disseminating tickets  often leading tennis fans to follow complex procedures to obtain tickets. * the international tournament began in 1925   === men s tournament structure ===   ==== masters 1000 ==== the atp world tour masters 1000 is a group of nine tournaments that form the second-highest echelon in men s tennis. each event is held annually  and a win at one of these events is worth 1000 ranking points. when the atp  led by hamilton jordan  began running the men s tour in 1990  the directors designated the top nine tournaments  outside of the grand slam events  as  super 9  events. in 2000 this became the tennis masters series and in 2004 the atp masters series. in november at the end
of the tennis year  the world s top eight players compete in the atp world tour finals  a tournament with a rotating locale. it is currently held in london  england.in august 2007 the atp announced major changes to the tour that were introduced in 2009. the masters series was renamed to the  masters 1000  the addition of the number 1000 referring to the number of ranking points earned by the winner of each tournament. contrary to earlier plans  the number of tournaments was not reduced from nine to eight and the monte carlo masters remains part of the series although  unlike the other events  it does not have a mandatory player commitment. the hamburg masters has been downgraded to a 500-point event. the madrid masters moved to may and onto clay courts  and a new tournament in shanghai took over madrid s former indoor october slot. as of 2011 six of the nine  1000  level tournaments are combined atp and wta events.   ==== 250 and 500 series ==== the third and fourth tier of men s tennis tournaments are formed by the atp world tour 500 series  consisting of 11 tournaments  and the atp world tour 250 series with 40 tournaments. like the atp world tour masters 1000  these events offer various amounts of prize money and the numbers refer to the amount of ranking points earned by the winner of a tournament. the dubai tennis championships offer the largest financial incentive to players  with total prize money of us$2 313 975 (2012). these series have various draws of 28  32  48 and 56 for singles and 16 and 24 for doubles. it is mandatory for leading players to enter at least four 500 events  including at least one after the us open.   ==== challenger tour and futures tournaments ==== the challenger tour for men is the lowest level of tournament administered by the atp. it is composed of about 150 events and  as a result  features a more diverse range of countries hosting events. the majority of players use the challenger series at the beginning of their career to work their way up the rankings. andre agassi  between winning grand slam tournaments  plummeted to world no. 141 and used challenger series events for match experience and to progress back up the rankings. the challenger series offers prize funds of between us$25 000 and us$150 000. below the challenger tour are the futures tournaments  events on the itf men s circuit. these tournaments also contribute towards a player s atp rankings points. futures tournaments offer prize funds of between us$10 000 and us$15 000. approximately 530 futures tournaments are played each year.   === women s tournament structure ===   ==== premier events ==== premier events for women form the most prestigious level of events on the women s tennis association tour after the grand slam tournaments. these events offer the largest rewards
in terms of points and prize money. within the premier category are premier mandatory  premier 5  and premier tournaments. the premier events were introduced in 2009 replacing the previous tier i and ii tournament categories. currently four tournaments are premier mandatory  five tournaments are premier 5  and twelve tournaments are premier. the first tiering system in women s tennis was introduced in 1988. at the time of its creation  only two tournaments  the lipton international players championships in florida and the german open in berlin  comprised the tier i category.   ==== international events ==== international tournaments are the second main tier of the wta tour and consist of 31 tournaments  with a prize money for every event at u.s.$220 000  except for the year-ending commonwealth bank tournament of champions in bali  which has prize money of u.s.$600 000.   == players ==   === professional players === professional tennis players enjoy the same relative perks as most top sports personalities  clothing  equipment and endorsements. like players of other individual sports such as golf  they are not salaried  but must play and finish highly in tournaments to obtain prize money. in recent years  some controversy has surrounded the involuntary or deliberate noise caused by players  grunting.   ==== singles and doubles professional careers ==== while players are gradually less competitive in singles by their late 20s and early 30s  they can still continue competitively in doubles (as instanced by martina navratilova and john mcenroe  who won doubles titles in their 40s). in the open era  several female players such as martina navratilova  margaret court  martina hingis  serena williams  and venus williams (the latter two sisters playing together) have been prolific at both singles and doubles events throughout their careers. john mcenroe is one of the very few professional male players to be top ranked in both singles and doubles at the same time  and yevgeny kafelnikov is the most recent male player to win multiple grand slams in both singles and doubles during the same period of his career. in terms of public attention and earnings (see below)  singles champions have far surpassed their doubles counterparts. the open era  particularly the men s side  has seen many top-ranked singles players that only sparingly compete in doubles  while having  doubles specialists  who are typically being eliminated early in the singles draw but do well in the doubles portion of a tournament. notable doubles pairings include the woodies (todd woodbridge and mark woodforde) and the bryan brothers (identical twin brothers robert charles  bob  bryan and michael carl  mike  bryan). woodbridge has disliked the term  doubles ‘specialists’  saying that he and woodforde  set a singles schedule and doubles fitted in around that  although later in woodbridge s career he focused exclusively on doubles as his singles ranking fell too low that it was
no longer financially viable to recover at that age. woodbridge noted that while top singles players earn enough that they don t need to nor want to play doubles  he suggested that lower-ranked singles players outside the top ten should play doubles to earn more playing time and money.   ==== olympics ==== the olympics doubles tennis tournament necessitates that both members of a doubles pairing be from the same country  hence several top professional pairs such as jamie murray and bruno soares cannot compete in the olympics. top-ranked singles players that are usually rivals on the professional circuit  such as boris becker and michael stich  and roger federer and stan wawrinka have formed a rare doubles partnership for the olympics. unlike professional tennis tournaments (see below) where singles players receive much more prize money than doubles players  an olympic medal for both singles and doubles has similar prestige. the olympics is more of a priority for doubles champions while singles champions often skip the tournament. while the atp has voted for olympic results to count towards player ranking points  wta players voted against it.for the 2000 olympics  lisa raymond was passed over for team usa in favor of serena williams by captain billie jean king  even though raymond was the top-ranked doubles player in the world at the time  and raymond unsuccessfully challenged the selection.   ==== prize money ==== in professional tennis tournaments such as wimbledon  the singles competition receives the most prize money and coverage  followed by doubles  and then mixed doubles usually receive the lowest monetary awards. for instance in the us open as of 2018  the men s and women s singles prize money (us$40 912 000) accounts for 80.9 percent of total player base compensation  while men s and women s doubles (us$6 140 840)  men s and women s singles qualifying (us$3 008 000)  and mixed doubles (us$505 000) account for 12.1 percent  5.9 percent  and 1.0 percent  respectively. the singles winner receives us$3 800 000  while the doubles winning pair receives $700 000 and the mixed doubles winning pair receives us$155 000.   === grand slam tournament winners ===  the following players have won at least five singles titles at grand slam tournaments    === greatest male players ===  a frequent topic of discussion among tennis fans and commentators is who was the greatest male singles player of all time. by a large margin  an associated press poll in 1950 named bill tilden as the greatest player of the first half of the 20th century. from 1920 to 1930  tilden won singles titles at wimbledon three times and the u.s. championships seven times. in 1938  however  donald budge became the first person to win all four major singles titles during the same calendar year  the grand slam  and won six consecutive major titles in 1937 and 1938. tilden called budge 
the finest player 365 days a year that ever lived.  in his 1979 autobiography  jack kramer said that  based on consistent play  budge was the greatest player ever. some observers  however  also felt that kramer deserved consideration for the title. kramer was among the few who dominated amateur and professional tennis during the late 1940s and early 1950s. tony trabert has said that of the players he saw before the start of the open era  kramer was the best male champion.  by the 1960s  budge and others had added pancho gonzales and lew hoad to the list of contenders. budge reportedly believed that gonzales was the greatest player ever. gonzales said about hoad   when lew s game was at its peak nobody could touch him. ... i think his game was the best game ever. better than mine. he was capable of making more shots than anybody. his two volleys were great. his overhead was enormous. he had the most natural tennis mind with the most natural tennis physique. before and during the open era  rod laver remains the only male player in history to have won the calendar year grand slam twice in 1962 and 1969  and also the calendar year professional grand slam in 1967. more recently björn borg and pete sampras were regarded by many of their contemporaries as among the greatest ever. andre agassi  the first of two male players in history to have achieved a career golden slam in singles tennis (followed by rafael nadal)  has been called the best service returner in the history of the game. he is the first man to win grand slams on all modern surfaces (previous holders of all grand slam tournaments played in an era of grass and clay only)  and is regarded by a number of critics and fellow players to be among the greatest players of all time. however it must be noted that both rod laver and ken rosewall also won major pro slam tournaments on all three surfaces (grass  clay  wood) rosewall in 1963 and laver in 1967.more recently  roger federer is considered by many observers to have the most  complete  game in modern tennis. he has won 20 grand slam titles and 6 world tour finals  the most for any male player. many experts of tennis  former tennis players and his own tennis peers believe federer is the greatest player in the history of the game. federer s biggest rival rafael nadal is regarded as the greatest competitor in tennis history by some former players and is regarded to have the potential to be the greatest of all time. nadal is regarded as the greatest clay court player of all time.   === greatest female players ===  as with the men there are frequent discussions about who is the greatest female singles player of all time with steffi graf  martina navratilova and serena williams being the three players most
often nominated. in march 2012 the tennischannel published a combined list of the 100 greatest men and women tennis players of all time. it ranked steffi graf as the greatest female player (in 3rd place overall)  followed by martina navratilova (4th place) and margaret court (8th place). the rankings were determined by an international panel.  sportswriter john wertheim of sports illustrated stated in an article in july 2010 that serena williams is the greatest female tennis player ever with the argument that  head-to-head  on a neutral surface (i.e. hard courts)  everyone at their best  i can t help feeling that she crushes the other legends. . in a reaction to this article yahoo sports blog busted racket published a list of the top-10 women s tennis players of all time placing martina navratilova in first spot. this top-10 list was similar to the one published in june 2008 by the bleacher report who also ranked martina navratilova as the top female player of all time.steffi graf is considered by some to be the greatest female player. billie jean king said in 1999   steffi is definitely the greatest women s tennis player of all time.  martina navratilova has included graf on her list of great players. in december 1999  graf was named the greatest female tennis player of the 20th century by a panel of experts assembled by the associated press. tennis writer steve flink  in his book the greatest tennis matches of the twentieth century  named her as the best female player of the 20th century  directly followed by martina navratilova.tennis magazine selected martina navratilova as the greatest female tennis player for the years 1965 through 2005. tennis historian and journalist bud collins has called navratilova  arguably  the greatest player of all time.  billie jean king said about navratilova in 2006   she s the greatest singles  doubles and mixed doubles player who s ever lived.    == in popular culture ==  tennis balles  are mentioned by william shakespeare in his play henry v (1599)  when a basket of them is given to king henry as a mockery of his youth and playfulness. david foster wallace  an amateur tennis player himself at urbana high school in illinois  included tennis in many of his works of nonfiction and fiction including  tennis player michael joyce s professional artistry as a paradigm of certain stuff about choice  freedom  discipline  joy  grotesquerie  and human completeness  the autobiographical piece  derivative sport in tornado alley  and infinite jest  which is partially set at the fictional  enfield tennis academy  in massachusetts. japanese manga series the prince of tennis revolves around the tennis prodigy echizen ryoma and tennis matches between rival schools. the royal tenenbaums (2001) features richie tenenbaum (luke wilson)  a tennis pro who suffers from depression and has a breakdown on court in front of thousands of fans. wimbledon (2004)
is a film about a discouraged pro tennis player (paul bettany) who meets a young woman on the women s tennis circuit (kirsten dunst) who helps him find his drive to go and win wimbledon. in the squid and the whale (2005)  joan (laura linney) has an affair with her kids  tennis coach  ivan (william baldwin). in a symbolic scene  joan s ex-husband  bernard (jeff daniels)  loses a tennis match against ivan in front of the kids. woody allen s match point (2005) features a love affair between a former tennis pro (jonathan rhys meyers) and his best friend s fiancé (scarlett johansson). confetti (2006) is a mockumentary which sees three couples competing to win the title of  most original wedding of the year . one competing couple (meredith macneill and stephen mangan) are a pair of hyper-competitive professional tennis players holding a tennis-themed wedding. there are several tennis video games including mario tennis  the topspin series  wii sports  and grand slam tennis.   == see also ==  outline of tennis glossary of tennis tennis games tennis injuries tennis strategy tennis technology tennis statistics   == references ==   == further reading ==   == external links ==  international organizationsinternational tennis federation (itf) association of tennis players (atp) – men s professional tennis organization women s tennis association (wta) – women s professional tennis organizationteam competitionsdavis cup fed cupothertennis at curlie international tennis hall of fame tennis grand slam tournaments history
basketball is a team sport in which two teams  most commonly of five players each  opposing one another on a rectangular court  compete with the primary objective of shooting a basketball (approximately 9.4 inches (24 cm) in diameter) through the defender s hoop (a basket 18 inches (46 cm) in diameter mounted 10 feet (3.048 m) high to a backboard at each end of the court) while preventing the opposing team from shooting through their own hoop.  a field goal is worth two points  unless made from behind the three-point line  when it is worth three.  after a foul  timed play stops and the player fouled or designated to shoot a technical foul is given one or more one-point free throws.  the team with the most points at the end of the game wins  but if regulation play expires with the score tied  an additional period of play (overtime) is mandated. players advance the ball by bouncing it while walking or running (dribbling) or by passing it to a teammate  both of which require considerable skill. on offense  players may use a variety of shots—the lay-up  the jump shot  or a dunk  on defense  they may steal the ball from a dribbler  intercept passes  or block shots  either offense or defense may collect a rebound  that is  a missed shot that bounces from rim or backboard.  it is a violation to lift or drag one s pivot foot without dribbling the ball  to carry it  or to hold the ball with both hands then resume dribbling. the five players on each side at a time fall into five playing positions  the tallest player is usually the center  the tallest and strongest is the power forward  a slightly shorter but more agile big man is the small forward  and the shortest players or the best ball handlers are the shooting guard and the point guard  who implements the coach s game plan by managing the execution of offensive and defensive plays (player positioning).  informally  players may play three-on-three  two-on-two  and one-on-one. invented in 1891 by canadian-american gym teacher james naismith in springfield  massachusetts  united states  basketball has evolved to become one of the world s most popular and widely viewed sports. the national basketball association (nba) is the most significant professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity  salaries  talent  and level of competition. outside north america  the top clubs from national leagues qualify to continental championships such as the euroleague and the basketball champions league americas. the fiba basketball world cup and men s olympic basketball tournament are the major international events of the sport and attract top national teams from around the world. each continent hosts regional competitions for national teams  like eurobasket and fiba americup. the fiba women s basketball world cup and women s olympic
basketball tournament feature top national teams from continental championships. the main north american league is the wnba (ncaa women s division i basketball championship is also popular)  whereas strongest european clubs participate in the euroleague women.   == history ==   === creation ===  in early december 1891  canadian james naismith  a physical education professor and instructor at the international young men s christian association training school (ymca) (today  springfield college) in springfield  massachusetts  was trying to keep his gym class active on a rainy day. he sought a vigorous indoor game to keep his students occupied and at proper levels of fitness during the long new england winters. after rejecting other ideas as either too rough or poorly suited to walled-in gymnasiums  he wrote the basic rules and nailed a peach basket onto a 10-foot (3.0 m) elevated track. in contrast with modern basketball nets  this peach basket retained its bottom  and balls had to be retrieved manually after each  basket  or point scored  this proved inefficient  however  so the bottom of the basket was removed  allowing the balls to be poked out with a long dowel each time.  basketball was originally played with a soccer ball. these round balls from  association football  were made  at the time  with a set of laces to close off the hole needed for inserting the inflatable bladder after the other sewn-together segments of the ball s cover had been flipped outside-in. these laces could cause bounce passes and dribbling to be unpredictable. eventually a lace-free ball construction method was invented  and this change to the game was endorsed by naismith. (whereas in american football  the lace construction proved to be advantageous for gripping and remains to this day.) the first balls made specifically for basketball were brown  and it was only in the late 1950s that tony hinkle  searching for a ball that would be more visible to players and spectators alike  introduced the orange ball that is now in common use. dribbling was not part of the original game except for the  bounce pass  to teammates. passing the ball was the primary means of ball movement. dribbling was eventually introduced but limited by the asymmetric shape of early balls. dribbling was common by 1896  with a rule against the double dribble by 1898.the peach baskets were used until 1906 when they were finally replaced by metal hoops with backboards. a further change was soon made  so the ball merely passed through. whenever a person got the ball in the basket  his team would gain a point. whichever team got the most points won the game. the baskets were originally nailed to the mezzanine balcony of the playing court  but this proved impractical when spectators in the balcony began to interfere with shots. the backboard was introduced to prevent this interference  it had the additional effect of allowing rebound
shots. naismith s handwritten diaries  discovered by his granddaughter in early 2006  indicate that he was nervous about the new game he had invented  which incorporated rules from a children s game called duck on a rock  as many had failed before it. frank mahan  one of the players from the original first game  approached naismith after the christmas break  in early 1892  asking him what he intended to call his new game. naismith replied that he hadn t thought of it because he had been focused on just getting the game started. mahan suggested that it be called  naismith ball  at which he laughed  saying that a name like that would kill any game. mahan then said   why not call it basketball  naismith replied   we have a basket and a ball  and it seems to me that would be a good name for it.  the first official game was played in the ymca gymnasium in albany  new york  on january 20  1892  with nine players. the game ended at 1–0  the shot was made from 25 feet (7.6 m)  on a court just half the size of a present-day streetball or national basketball association (nba) court. at the time  football was being played with 10 to a team (which was increased to 11). when winter weather got too icy to play football  teams were taken indoors  and it was convenient to have them split in half and play basketball with five on each side.  by 1897–1898 teams of five became standard.   === college basketball ===  basketball s early adherents were dispatched to ymcas throughout the united states  and it quickly spread through the united states and canada. by 1895  it was well established at several women s high schools. while the ymca was responsible for initially developing and spreading the game  within a decade it discouraged the new sport  as rough play and rowdy crowds began to detract from the ymca s primary mission. however  other amateur sports clubs  colleges  and professional clubs quickly filled the void. in the years before world war i  the amateur athletic union and the intercollegiate athletic association of the united states (forerunner of the ncaa) vied for control over the rules for the game. the first pro league  the national basketball league  was formed in 1898 to protect players from exploitation and to promote a less rough game. this league only lasted five years. james naismith was instrumental in establishing college basketball. his colleague c.o. beamis fielded the first college basketball team just a year after the springfield ymca game at the suburban pittsburgh geneva college. naismith himself later coached at the university of kansas for six years  before handing the reins to renowned coach forrest  phog  allen. naismith s disciple amos alonzo stagg brought basketball to the university of chicago
 while adolph rupp  a student of naismith s at kansas  enjoyed great success as coach at the university of kentucky. on february 9  1895  the first intercollegiate 5-on-5 game was played at hamline university between hamline and the school of agriculture  which was affiliated with the university of minnesota. the school of agriculture won in a 9–3 game. in 1901  colleges  including the university of chicago  columbia university  cornell university  dartmouth college  the university of minnesota  the u.s. naval academy  the university of colorado and yale university began sponsoring men s games. in 1905  frequent injuries on the football field prompted president theodore roosevelt to suggest that colleges form a governing body  resulting in the creation of the intercollegiate athletic association of the united states (iaaus). in 1910  that body would change its name to the national collegiate athletic association (ncaa). the first canadian interuniversity basketball game was played at the ymca in kingston  ontario on february 6  1904  when mcgill university—naismith s alma mater—visited queen s university. mcgill won 9–7 in overtime  the score was 7–7 at the end of regulation play  and a ten-minute overtime period settled the outcome. a good turnout of spectators watched the game.the first men s national championship tournament  the national association of intercollegiate basketball tournament  which still exists as the national association of intercollegiate athletics (naia) tournament  was organized in 1937. the first national championship for ncaa teams  the national invitation tournament (nit) in new york  was organized in 1938  the ncaa national tournament would begin one year later. college basketball was rocked by gambling scandals from 1948 to 1951  when dozens of players from top teams were implicated in match fixing and point shaving. partially spurred by an association with cheating  the nit lost support to the ncaa tournament.   === high school basketball ===  before widespread school district consolidation  most american high schools were far smaller than their present-day counterparts. during the first decades of the 20th century  basketball quickly became the ideal interscholastic sport due to its modest equipment and personnel requirements. in the days before widespread television coverage of professional and college sports  the popularity of high school basketball was unrivaled in many parts of america. perhaps the most legendary of high school teams was indiana s franklin wonder five  which took the nation by storm during the 1920s  dominating indiana basketball and earning national recognition. today virtually every high school in the united states fields a basketball team in varsity competition. basketball s popularity remains high  both in rural areas where they carry the identification of the entire community  as well as at some larger schools known for their basketball teams where many players go on to participate at higher levels of competition after graduation. in the 2016–17 season  980 673 boys and girls represented their schools in interscholastic basketball
competition  according to the national federation of state high school associations. the states of illinois  indiana and kentucky are particularly well known for their residents  devotion to high school basketball  commonly called hoosier hysteria in indiana  the critically acclaimed film hoosiers shows high school basketball s depth of meaning to these communities. there is currently no tournament to determine a national high school champion. the most serious effort was the national interscholastic basketball tournament at the university of chicago from 1917 to 1930. the event was organized by amos alonzo stagg and sent invitations to state champion teams. the tournament started out as a mostly midwest affair but grew. in 1929 it had 29 state champions. faced with opposition from the national federation of state high school associations and north central association of colleges and schools that bore a threat of the schools losing their accreditation the last tournament was in 1930. the organizations said they were concerned that the tournament was being used to recruit professional players from the prep ranks. the tournament did not invite minority schools or private/parochial schools. the national catholic interscholastic basketball tournament ran from 1924 to 1941 at loyola university. the national catholic invitational basketball tournament from 1954 to 1978 played at a series of venues  including catholic university  georgetown and george mason. the national interscholastic basketball tournament for black high schools was held from 1929 to 1942 at hampton institute. the national invitational interscholastic basketball tournament was held from 1941 to 1967 starting out at tuskegee institute. following a pause during world war ii it resumed at tennessee state college in nashville. the basis for the champion dwindled after 1954 when brown v. board of education began an integration of schools. the last tournaments were held at alabama state college from 1964 to 1967.   === professional basketball ===  teams abounded throughout the 1920s. there were hundreds of men s professional basketball teams in towns and cities all over the united states  and little organization of the professional game. players jumped from team to team and teams played in armories and smoky dance halls. leagues came and went. barnstorming squads such as the original celtics and two all-african american teams  the new york renaissance five ( rens ) and the (still existing) harlem globetrotters played up to two hundred games a year on their national tours. in 1946  the basketball association of america (baa) was formed. the first game was played in toronto  ontario  canada between the toronto huskies and new york knickerbockers on november 1  1946. three seasons later  in 1949  the baa merged with the national basketball league (nbl) to form the national basketball association (nba). by the 1950s  basketball had become a major college sport  thus paving the way for a growth of interest in professional basketball. in 1959  a basketball hall of fame was founded in springfield  massachusetts  site of the first game. its rosters include the names of
great players  coaches  referees and people who have contributed significantly to the development of the game. the hall of fame has people who have accomplished many goals in their career in basketball. an upstart organization  the american basketball association  emerged in 1967 and briefly threatened the nba s dominance until the aba-nba merger in 1976. today the nba is the top professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity  salaries  talent  and level of competition. the nba has featured many famous players  including george mikan  the first dominating  big man  ball-handling wizard bob cousy and defensive genius bill russell of the boston celtics  charismatic center wilt chamberlain  who originally played for the barnstorming harlem globetrotters  all-around stars oscar robertson and jerry west  more recent big men kareem abdul-jabbar  shaquille o neal  hakeem olajuwon and karl malone  playmakers john stockton  isiah thomas and steve nash  crowd-pleasing forwards julius erving and charles barkley  european stars dirk nowitzki  pau gasol and tony parker  more recent superstars lebron james  allen iverson and kobe bryant  and the three players who many credit with ushering the professional game to its highest level of popularity during the 1980s and 1990s  larry bird  earvin  magic  johnson  and michael jordan. in 2001  the nba formed a developmental league  the national basketball development league (later known as the nba d-league and then the nba g league after a branding deal with gatorade). as of the 2018–19 season  the g league has 27 teams.   === international basketball ===  fiba (international basketball federation) was formed in 1932 by eight founding nations  argentina  czechoslovakia  greece  italy  latvia  portugal  romania and switzerland. at this time  the organization only oversaw amateur players. its acronym  derived from the french fédération internationale de basket-ball amateur  was thus  fiba . men s basketball was first included at the berlin 1936 summer olympics  although a demonstration tournament was held in 1904. the united states defeated canada in the first final  played outdoors. this competition has usually been dominated by the united states  whose team has won all but three titles. the first of these came in a controversial final game in munich in 1972 against the soviet union  in which the ending of the game was replayed three times until the soviet union finally came out on top. in 1950 the first fiba world championship for men  now known as the fiba basketball world cup  was held in argentina. three years later  the first fiba world championship for women  now known as the fiba women s basketball world cup  was held in chile. women s basketball was added to the olympics in 1976  which were held in montreal  quebec  canada with teams such as the soviet union  brazil and
australia rivaling the american squads. in 1989  fiba allowed professional nba players to participate in the olympics for the first time. prior to the 1992 summer olympics  only european and south american teams were allowed to field professionals in the olympics. the united states  dominance continued with the introduction of the original dream team. in the 2004 athens olympics  the united states suffered its first olympic loss while using professional players  falling to puerto rico (in a 19-point loss) and lithuania in group games  and being eliminated in the semifinals by argentina. it eventually won the bronze medal defeating lithuania  finishing behind argentina and italy. the redeem team  won gold at the 2008 olympics  and the b-team  won gold at the 2010 fiba world championship in turkey despite featuring no players from the 2008 squad. the united states continued its dominance as they won gold at the 2012 olympics  2014 fiba world cup and the 2016 olympics.  worldwide  basketball tournaments are held for boys and girls of all age levels. the global popularity of the sport is reflected in the nationalities represented in the nba. players from all six inhabited continents currently play in the nba. top international players began coming into the nba in the mid-1990s  including croatians dražen petrović and toni kukoč  serbian vlade divac  lithuanians arvydas sabonis and šarūnas marčiulionis  dutchman rik smits and german detlef schrempf. in the philippines  the philippine basketball association s first game was played on april 9  1975 at the araneta coliseum in cubao  quezon city. philippines. it was founded as a  rebellion  of several teams from the now-defunct manila industrial and commercial athletic association  which was tightly controlled by the basketball association of the philippines (now defunct)  the then-fiba recognized national association. nine teams from the micaa participated in the league s first season that opened on april 9  1975. the nbl is australia s pre-eminent men s professional basketball league. the league commenced in 1979  playing a winter season (april–september) and did so until the completion of the 20th season in 1998. the 1998–99 season  which commenced only months later  was the first season after the shift to the current summer season format (october–april). this shift was an attempt to avoid competing directly against australia s various football codes. it features 8 teams from around australia and one in new zealand. a few players including luc longley  andrew gaze  shane heal  chris anstey and andrew bogut made it big internationally  becoming poster figures for the sport in australia. the women s national basketball league began in 1981.   === women s basketball ===  women s basketball began in 1892 at smith college when senda berenson  a physical education teacher  modified naismith s rules for women. shortly after she was hired at smith  she went to naismith to learn more about the game. fascinated by the
new sport and the values it could teach  she organized the first women s collegiate basketball game on march 21  1893  when her smith freshmen and sophomores played against one another. however  the first women s interinstitutional game was played in 1892 between the university of california and miss head s school. berenson s rules were first published in 1899  and two years later she became the editor of a. g. spalding s first women s basketball guide. berenson s freshmen played the sophomore class in the first women s intercollegiate basketball game at smith college  march 21  1893. the same year  mount holyoke and sophie newcomb college (coached by clara gregory baer) women began playing basketball. by 1895  the game had spread to colleges across the country  including wellesley  vassar  and bryn mawr. the first intercollegiate women s game was on april 4  1896. stanford women played berkeley  9-on-9  ending in a 2–1 stanford victory. women s basketball development was more structured than that for men in the early years. in 1905  the executive committee on basket ball rules (national women s basketball committee) was created by the american physical education association. these rules called for six to nine players per team and 11 officials. the international women s sports federation (1924) included a women s basketball competition. 37 women s high school varsity basketball or state tournaments were held by 1925. and in 1926  the amateur athletic union backed the first national women s basketball championship  complete with men s rules. the edmonton grads  a touring canadian women s team based in edmonton  alberta  operated between 1915 and 1940. the grads toured all over north america  and were exceptionally successful. they posted a record of 522 wins and only 20 losses over that span  as they met any team that wanted to challenge them  funding their tours from gate receipts. the grads also shone on several exhibition trips to europe  and won four consecutive exhibition olympics tournaments  in 1924  1928  1932  and 1936  however  women s basketball was not an official olympic sport until 1976. the grads  players were unpaid  and had to remain single. the grads  style focused on team play  without overly emphasizing skills of individual players. the first women s aau all-america team was chosen in 1929. women s industrial leagues sprang up throughout the united states  producing famous athletes  including babe didrikson of the golden cyclones  and the all american red heads team  which competed against men s teams  using men s rules. by 1938  the women s national championship changed from a three-court game to two-court game with six players per team.  the nba-backed women s national basketball association (wnba) began in 1997. though it had shaky attendance figures  several marquee players (lisa leslie  diana taurasi  and candace parker among
others) have helped the league s popularity and level of competition. other professional women s basketball leagues in the united states  such as the american basketball league (1996–98)  have folded in part because of the popularity of the wnba. the wnba has been looked at by many as a niche league. however  the league has recently taken steps forward. in june 2007  the wnba signed a contract extension with espn. the new television deal ran from 2009 to 2016. along with this deal  came the first ever rights fees to be paid to a women s professional sports league. over the eight years of the contract   millions and millions of dollars  were  dispersed to the league s teams.  in a march 12  2009 article  nba commissioner david stern said that in the bad economy   the nba is far less profitable than the wnba. we re losing a lot of money among a large number of teams. we re budgeting the wnba to break even this year.    == rules and regulations ==  measurements and time limits discussed in this section often vary among tournaments and organizations  international and nba rules are used in this section. the object of the game is to outscore one s opponents by throwing the ball through the opponents  basket from above while preventing the opponents from doing so on their own. an attempt to score in this way is called a shot. a successful shot is worth two points  or three points if it is taken from beyond the three-point arc 6.75 metres (22 ft 2 in) from the basket in international games and 23 feet 9 inches (7.24 m) in nba games. a one-point shot can be earned when shooting from the foul line after a foul is made.   === playing regulations === games are played in four quarters of 10 (fiba) or 12 minutes (nba). college men s games use two 20-minute halves  college women s games use 10-minute quarters  and most united states high school varsity games use 8-minute quarters  however  this varies from state to state. 15 minutes are allowed for a half-time break under fiba  nba  and ncaa rules and 10 minutes in united states high schools. overtime periods are five minutes in length except for high school  which is four minutes in length. teams exchange baskets for the second half. the time allowed is actual playing time  the clock is stopped while the play is not active. therefore  games generally take much longer to complete than the allotted game time  typically about two hours. five players from each team may be on the court at one time. substitutions are unlimited but can only be done when play is stopped. teams also have a coach  who oversees the development and strategies of the team  and other team personnel such as assistant coaches  managers  statisticians  doctors
and trainers. for both men s and women s teams  a standard uniform consists of a pair of shorts and a jersey with a clearly visible number  unique within the team  printed on both the front and back. players wear high-top sneakers that provide extra ankle support. typically  team names  players  names and  outside of north america  sponsors are printed on the uniforms. a limited number of time-outs  clock stoppages requested by a coach (or sometimes mandated in the nba) for a short meeting with the players  are allowed. they generally last no longer than one minute (100 seconds in the nba) unless  for televised games  a commercial break is needed. the game is controlled by the officials consisting of the referee (referred to as crew chief in the nba)  one or two umpires (referred to as referees in the nba) and the table officials. for college  the nba  and many high schools  there are a total of three referees on the court. the table officials are responsible for keeping track of each teams scoring  timekeeping  individual and team fouls  player substitutions  team possession arrow  and the shot clock.   === equipment ===  the only essential equipment in a basketball game is the ball and the court  a flat  rectangular surface with baskets at opposite ends. competitive levels require the use of more equipment such as clocks  score sheets  scoreboard(s)  alternating possession arrows  and whistle-operated stop-clock systems.  a regulation basketball court in international games is 91.9 feet (28.0 meters) long and 49.2 feet (15 meters) wide. in the nba and ncaa the court is 94 by 50 feet (29 by 15 meters). most courts have wood flooring  usually constructed from maple planks running in the same direction as the longer court dimension. the name and logo of the home team is usually painted on or around the center circle. the basket is a steel rim 18 inches (46 cm) diameter with an attached net affixed to a backboard that measures 6 by 3.5 feet (1.8 by 1.1 meters) and one basket is at each end of the court. the white outlined box on the backboard is 18 inches (46 cm) high and 2 feet (61 cm) wide. at almost all levels of competition  the top of the rim is exactly 10 feet (3.05 meters) above the court and 4 feet (1.22 meters) inside the baseline. while variation is possible in the dimensions of the court and backboard  it is considered important for the basket to be of the correct height – a rim that is off by just a few inches can have an adverse effect on shooting. the size of the basketball is also regulated. for men  the official ball is 29.5 inches (75 cm) in circumference (size 7  or a  295 ball ) and weighs 22 oz (623.69 grams). if women are playing 
the official basketball size is 28.5 inches (72 cm) in circumference (size 6  or a  285 ball ) with a weight of 20 oz (567 grams). in 3x3  a formalized version of the halfcourt 3-on-3 game  a dedicated ball with the circumference of a size 6 ball but the weight of a size 7 ball is used in all competitions (men s  women s  and mixed teams).   === violations === the ball may be advanced toward the basket by being shot  passed between players  thrown  tapped  rolled or dribbled (bouncing the ball while running). the ball must stay within the court  the last team to touch the ball before it travels out of bounds forfeits possession. the ball is out of bounds if it touches a boundary line  or touches any player or object that is out of bounds. there are limits placed on the steps a player may take without dribbling  which commonly results in an infraction known as traveling. nor may a player stop his dribble and then resume dribbling. a dribble that touches both hands is considered stopping the dribble  giving this infraction the name double dribble. within a dribble  the player cannot carry the ball by placing his hand on the bottom of the ball  doing so is known as carrying the ball. a team  once having established ball control in the front half of their court  may not return the ball to the backcourt and be the first to touch it. a violation of these rules results in loss of possession. the ball may not be kicked  nor be struck with the fist. for the offense  a violation of these rules results in loss of possession  for the defense  most leagues reset the shot clock and the offensive team is given possession of the ball out of bounds. there are limits imposed on the time taken before progressing the ball past halfway (8 seconds in fiba and the nba  10 seconds in ncaa and high school for both sexes)  before attempting a shot (24 seconds in fiba  the nba  and u sports (canadian universities) play for both sexes  and 30 seconds in ncaa play for both sexes)  holding the ball while closely guarded (5 seconds)  and remaining in the restricted area known as the free-throw lane  (or the  key ) (3 seconds). these rules are designed to promote more offense. basket interference  or goaltending is a violation charged when a player illegally interferes with a shot. this violation is incurred when a player touches the ball on its downward trajectory to the basket  unless it is obvious that the ball has no chance of entering the basket  if a player touches the ball while it is in the rim  or in the area extended upwards from the basket  or if a player reaches through the basket to interfere with
the shot. when a defensive player is charged with goaltending  the basket is awarded. if an offensive player commits the infraction  the basket is cancelled. in either case possession of the ball is turned over to the defensive team.   === fouls ===  an attempt to unfairly disadvantage an opponent through certain types of physical contact is illegal and is called a personal foul. these are most commonly committed by defensive players  however  they can be committed by offensive players as well. players who are fouled either receive the ball to pass inbounds again  or receive one or more free throws if they are fouled in the act of shooting  depending on whether the shot was successful. one point is awarded for making a free throw  which is attempted from a line 15 feet (4.6 m) from the basket. the referee is responsible for judging whether contact is illegal  sometimes resulting in controversy. the calling of fouls can vary between games  leagues and referees. there is a second category of fouls called technical fouls  which may be charged for various rules violations including failure to properly record a player in the scorebook  or for unsportsmanlike conduct. these infractions result in one or two free throws  which may be taken by any of the five players on the court at the time. repeated incidents can result in disqualification. a blatant foul involving physical contact that is either excessive or unnecessary is called an intentional foul (flagrant foul in the nba). in fiba and ncaa women s basketball  a foul resulting in ejection is called a disqualifying foul  while in leagues other than the nba  such a foul is referred to as flagrant. if a team exceeds a certain limit of team fouls in a given period (quarter or half) – four for nba  ncaa women s  and international games – the opposing team is awarded one or two free throws on all subsequent non-shooting fouls for that period  the number depending on the league. in the us college men s game and high school games for both sexes  if a team reaches 7 fouls in a half  the opposing team is awarded one free throw  along with a second shot if the first is made. this is called shooting  one-and-one . if a team exceeds 10 fouls in the half  the opposing team is awarded two free throws on all subsequent fouls for the half. when a team shoots foul shots  the opponents may not interfere with the shooter  nor may they try to regain possession until the last or potentially last free throw is in the air. after a team has committed a specified number of fouls  the other team is said to be  in the bonus . on scoreboards  this is usually signified with an indicator light reading  bonus  or  penalty  with an illuminated directional arrow or
dot indicating that team is to receive free throws when fouled by the opposing team. (some scoreboards also indicate the number of fouls committed.) if a team misses the first shot of a two-shot situation  the opposing team must wait for the completion of the second shot before attempting to reclaim possession of the ball and continuing play. if a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is unsuccessful  the player is awarded a number of free throws equal to the value of the attempted shot. a player fouled while attempting a regular two-point shot thus receives two shots  and a player fouled while attempting a three-point shot receives three shots. if a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is successful  typically the player will be awarded one additional free throw for one point. in combination with a regular shot  this is called a  three-point play  or  four-point play  (or more colloquially  an  and one ) because of the basket made at the time of the foul (2 or 3 points) and the additional free throw (1 point).   == common techniques and practices ==   === positions ===  although the rules do not specify any positions whatsoever  they have evolved as part of basketball. during the early years of basketball s evolution  two guards  two forwards  and one center were used. in more recent times specific positions evolved  but the current trend  advocated by many top coaches including mike krzyzewski is towards positionless basketball  where big guys are free to shoot from outside and dribble if their skill allows it. popular descriptions of positions include  point guard (often called the  1 )   usually the fastest player on the team  organizes the team s offense by controlling the ball and making sure that it gets to the right player at the right time. shooting guard (the  2 )   creates a high volume of shots on offense  mainly long-ranged  and guards the opponent s best perimeter player on defense. small forward (the  3 )   often primarily responsible for scoring points via cuts to the basket and dribble penetration  on defense seeks rebounds and steals  but sometimes plays more actively. power forward (the  4 )  plays offensively often with their back to the basket  on defense  plays under the basket (in a zone defense) or against the opposing power forward (in man-to-man defense). center (the  5 )  uses height and size to score (on offense)  to protect the basket closely (on defense)  or to rebound. the above descriptions are flexible. for most teams today  the shooting guard and small forward have very similar responsibilities and are often called the wings  as do the power forward and center  who are often called post players. while most teams describe two players as
guards  two as forwards  and one as a center  on some occasions teams choose to call them by different designations.   === strategy ===  there are two main defensive strategies  zone defense and man-to-man defense. in a zone defense  each player is assigned to guard a specific area of the court. zone defenses often allow the defense to double team the ball  a manoeuver known as a trap. in a man-to-man defense  each defensive player guards a specific opponent. offensive plays are more varied  normally involving planned passes and movement by players without the ball. a quick movement by an offensive player without the ball to gain an advantageous position is known as a cut. a legal attempt by an offensive player to stop an opponent from guarding a teammate  by standing in the defender s way such that the teammate cuts next to him  is a screen or pick. the two plays are combined in the pick and roll  in which a player sets a pick and then  rolls  away from the pick towards the basket. screens and cuts are very important in offensive plays  these allow the quick passes and teamwork  which can lead to a successful basket. teams almost always have several offensive plays planned to ensure their movement is not predictable. on court  the point guard is usually responsible for indicating which play will occur.   === shooting ===  shooting is the act of attempting to score points by throwing the ball through the basket  methods varying with players and situations. typically  a player faces the basket with both feet facing the basket. a player will rest the ball on the fingertips of the dominant hand (the shooting arm) slightly above the head  with the other hand supporting the side of the ball. the ball is usually shot by jumping (though not always) and extending the shooting arm. the shooting arm  fully extended with the wrist fully bent  is held stationary for a moment following the release of the ball  known as a follow-through. players often try to put a steady backspin on the ball to absorb its impact with the rim. the ideal trajectory of the shot is somewhat controversial  but generally a proper arc is recommended. players may shoot directly into the basket or may use the backboard to redirect the ball into the basket.  the two most common shots that use the above described setup are the set shot and the jump shot. the set shot is taken from a standing position  with neither foot leaving the floor  typically used for free throws  and in other circumstances while the jump shot is taken in mid-air  the ball released near the top of the jump. this provides much greater power and range  and it also allows the player to elevate over the defender. failure to release the ball before the feet return to
the floor is considered a traveling violation. another common shot is called the lay-up. this shot requires the player to be in motion toward the basket  and to  lay  the ball  up  and into the basket  typically off the backboard (the backboard-free  underhand version is called a finger roll). the most crowd-pleasing and typically highest-percentage accuracy shot is the slam dunk  in which the player jumps very high and throws the ball downward  through the basket while touching it.  another shot that is becoming common is the  circus shot . the circus shot is a low-percentage shot that is flipped  heaved  scooped  or flung toward the hoop while the shooter is off-balance  airborne  falling down  and/or facing away from the basket. a back-shot is a shot taken when the player is facing away from the basket  and may be shot with the dominant hand  or both  but there is a very low chance that the shot will be successful. a shot that misses both the rim and the backboard completely is referred to as an air ball. a particularly bad shot  or one that only hits the backboard  is jocularly called a brick. the hang time is the length of time a player stays in the air after jumping  either to make a slam dunk  lay-up or jump shot.   === rebounding ===  the objective of rebounding is to successfully gain possession of the basketball after a missed field goal or free throw  as it rebounds from the hoop or backboard. this plays a major role in the game  as most possessions end when a team misses a shot. there are two categories of rebounds  offensive rebounds  in which the ball is recovered by the offensive side and does not change possession  and defensive rebounds  in which the defending team gains possession of the loose ball. the majority of rebounds are defensive  as the team on defense tends to be in better position to recover missed shots.   === passing ===  a pass is a method of moving the ball between players. most passes are accompanied by a step forward to increase power and are followed through with the hands to ensure accuracy. a staple pass is the chest pass. the ball is passed directly from the passer s chest to the receiver s chest. a proper chest pass involves an outward snap of the thumbs to add velocity and leaves the defence little time to react. another type of pass is the bounce pass. here  the passer bounces the ball crisply about two-thirds of the way from his own chest to the receiver. the ball strikes the court and bounces up toward the receiver. the bounce pass takes longer to complete than the chest pass  but it is also harder for the opposing team to intercept (kicking the ball deliberately is a violation). thus
 players often use the bounce pass in crowded moments  or to pass around a defender. the overhead pass is used to pass the ball over a defender. the ball is released while over the passer s head. the outlet pass occurs after a team gets a defensive rebound. the next pass after the rebound is the outlet pass. the crucial aspect of any good pass is it being difficult to intercept. good passers can pass the ball with great accuracy and they know exactly where each of their other teammates prefers to receive the ball. a special way of doing this is passing the ball without looking at the receiving teammate. this is called a no-look pass. another advanced style of passing is the behind-the-back pass  which  as the description implies  involves throwing the ball behind the passer s back to a teammate. although some players can perform such a pass effectively  many coaches discourage no-look or behind-the-back passes  believing them to be difficult to control and more likely to result in turnovers or violations.   === dribbling ===  dribbling is the act of bouncing the ball continuously with one hand and is a requirement for a player to take steps with the ball. to dribble  a player pushes the ball down towards the ground with the fingertips rather than patting it  this ensures greater control. when dribbling past an opponent  the dribbler should dribble with the hand farthest from the opponent  making it more difficult for the defensive player to get to the ball. it is therefore important for a player to be able to dribble competently with both hands. good dribblers (or  ball handlers ) tend to bounce the ball low to the ground  reducing the distance of travel of the ball from the floor to the hand  making it more difficult for the defender to  steal  the ball. good ball handlers frequently dribble behind their backs  between their legs  and switch directions suddenly  making a less predictable dribbling pattern that is more difficult to defend against. this is called a crossover  which is the most effective way to move past defenders while dribbling. a skilled player can dribble without watching the ball  using the dribbling motion or peripheral vision to keep track of the ball s location. by not having to focus on the ball  a player can look for teammates or scoring opportunities  as well as avoid the danger of having someone steal the ball away from him/her.   === blocking ===  a block is performed when  after a shot is attempted  a defender succeeds in altering the shot by touching the ball. in almost all variants of play  it is illegal to touch the ball after it is in the downward path of its arc  this is known as goaltending. it is also illegal under nba and men s ncaa basketball to block a shot after
it has touched the backboard  or when any part of the ball is directly above the rim. under international rules it is illegal to block a shot that is in the downward path of its arc or one that has touched the backboard until the ball has hit the rim. after the ball hits the rim  it is again legal to touch it even though it is no longer considered as a block performed. to block a shot  a player has to be able to reach a point higher than where the shot is released. thus  height can be an advantage in blocking. players who are taller and playing the power forward or center positions generally record more blocks than players who are shorter and playing the guard positions. however  with good timing and a sufficiently high vertical leap  even shorter players can be effective shot blockers.   == height == at the professional level  most male players are above 6 feet 3 inches (1.91 m) and most women above 5 feet 7 inches (1.70 m). guards  for whom physical coordination and ball-handling skills are crucial  tend to be the smallest players. almost all forwards in the top men s pro leagues are 6 feet 6 inches (1.98 m) or taller. most centers are over 6 feet 10 inches (2.08 m) tall. according to a survey given to all nba teams  the average height of all nba players is just under 6 feet 7 inches (2.01 m)  with the average weight being close to 222 pounds (101 kg). the tallest players ever in the nba were manute bol and gheorghe mureșan  who were both 7 feet 7 inches (2.31 m) tall. at 7 feet 2 inches (2.18 m)  margo dydek was the tallest player in the history of the wnba. the shortest player ever to play in the nba is muggsy bogues at 5 feet 3 inches (1.60 m). other short players have thrived at the pro level. anthony  spud  webb was just 5 feet 7 inches (1.70 m) tall  but had a 42-inch (1.1 m) vertical leap  giving him significant height when jumping. while shorter players are often at a disadvantage in certain aspects of the game  their ability to navigate quickly through crowded areas of the court and steal the ball by reaching low are strengths. players regularly inflate their height. many prospects exaggerate their height while in high school or college to make themselves more appealing to coaches and scouts  who prefer taller players. charles barkley stated   i ve been measured at 6-5  6-4 ​3⁄4. but i started in college at 6-6.  sam smith  a former writer from the chicago tribune  said   we sort of know the heights  because after camp  the sheet comes out. but you use that height  and the player gets mad. and then you hear from his agent. or you file your story with
the right height  and the copy desk changes it because they have the  official  n.b.a. media guide  which is wrong. so you sort of go along with the joke.  in the nba  there is no standard on whether a player s listed height uses their measurement with shoes on or without. the nba draft combine  which most players attend before the draft  provides both measurements. thereafter  a player s team is solely responsible for their listed height  which can vary depending on the process selected.notable players who overstated their height include   kobe bryant whose listed height is 6 feet 6 inches (1.98 m)  while his actual height is 6 feet 4 inches (1.93 m) charles barkley whose listed height is 6 feet 6 inches (1.98 m)  while his actual height is just under 6 feet 5 inches (1.96 m) kevin love  whose listed height is 6 feet 10 inches (2.08 m)  while his actual height is just under 6 feet 8 inches (2.03 m) jason collins whose listed height is 7 feet 0 inches (2.13 m)  while his actual height is 6 feet 8 inches (2.03 m) dwight howard whose listed height is 6 feet 11 inches (2.11 m)  while his actual height is 6 feet 9 inches (2.06 m)on rare occasions  some players will understate their actual heights  not to be repositioned. one example is kevin durant  whose listed height is 6 feet 9 inches (2.06 m)  while his actual height is 7 feet 0 inches (2.13 m). durant s reasoning was   really  that s the prototypical size for a small forward. anything taller than that  and they ll start saying   ah  he s a power forward.    == variations and similar games ==  variations of basketball are activities based on the game of basketball  using common basketball skills and equipment (primarily the ball and basket). some variations are only superficial rules changes  while others are distinct games with varying degrees of basketball influences. other variations include children s games  contests or activities meant to help players reinforce skills. there are principal basketball sports with variations on basketball including wheelchair basketball  water basketball  beach basketball  slamball  streetball and unicycle basketball. an earlier version of basketball  played primarily by women and girls  was six-on-six basketball. horseball is a game played on horseback where a ball is handled and points are scored by shooting it through a high net (approximately 1.5m×1.5m). the sport is like a combination of polo  rugby  and basketball. there is even a form played on donkeys known as donkey basketball  but that version has come under attack from animal rights groups.   === half-court === perhaps the single most common variation of basketball is the half-court game  played in informal settings without referees or strict rules. only one basket is used  and
the ball must be  taken back  or  cleared  – passed or dribbled outside the three-point line each time possession of the ball changes from one team to the other. half-court games require less cardiovascular stamina  since players need not run back and forth a full court. half-court raises the number of players that can use a court or  conversely  can be played if there is an insufficient number to form full 5-on-5 teams. half-court basketball is usually played 1-on-1  2-on-2 or 3-on-3. the latter variation is gradually gaining official recognition as 3x3  originally known as fiba 33. it was first tested at the 2007 asian indoor games in macau and the first official tournaments were held at the 2009 asian youth games and the 2010 youth olympics  both in singapore. the first fiba 3x3 youth world championships were held in rimini  italy in 2011  with the first fiba 3x3 world championships for senior teams following a year later in athens. the sport is highly tipped to become an olympic sport as early as 2016. in the summer of 2017  the big3 basketball league  a professional 3x3 half court basketball league that features former nba players  began. the big3 features several rule variants including a four-point field goal.   === other variations === there are also other basketball sports  such as   one-on-one -  it is a variation in which two players will use only a small section of the court (often no more than a half of a court) and compete to play the ball into a single hoop. such games tend to emphasize individual dribbling and ball stealing skills over shooting and team play. water basketball - water basketball  played in a swimming pool  merges basketball and water polo rules. beach basketball - a modified version of basketball  played on beaches  was invented by philip bryant. beach basketball is played in a circular court with no backboard on the goal  no out-of-bounds rule with the ball movement to be done via passes or 21/2 steps  as dribbling is next to impossible on a soft surface. beach basketball has grown to a very popular  widespread competitive sport. 15 annual world championships have been organized. dunk hoops - dunk hoops (a.k.a. dunk ball) is a variation of the game of basketball  played on basketball hoops with lowered (under basketball regulation 10 feet) rims. it originated when the popularity of the slam dunk grew and was developed to create better chances for dunks with lowered rims and using altered goaltending rules. slamball - slamball is full-contact basketball  with trampolines. points are scored by playing the ball through the net  as in basketball  though the point-scoring rules are modified. the main differences from the parent sport is the court  below the padded basketball rim and backboard are four trampolines set into the floor  which serve to propel players to great heights for slam
dunks. the rules also permit some physical contact between the members of the four-player teams. streetball - streetball is a less formal variant of basketball  played on playgrounds and in gymnasiums across the world. often only one half of the court is used  but otherwise  the rules of the game are very similar to those of basketball. the number of participants in a game  or a run  may range from one defender and one person on offense (known as one on one) to two full teams of five each. streetball is a very popular game worldwide  and some cities in the united states have organized streetball programs  such as midnight basketball. many cities also host their own weekend-long streetball tournaments. unicycle basketball - unicycle basketball is played using a regulation basketball on a regular basketball court with the same rules  for example  one must dribble the ball while riding. there are a number of rules that are particular to unicycle basketball as well  for example  a player must have at least one foot on a pedal when in-bounding the ball. unicycle basketball is usually played using 24  or smaller unicycles  and using plastic pedals  both to preserve the court and the players  shins. in north america  popular unicycle basketball games are organized.spin-offs from basketball that are now separate sports include   ringball  a traditional south african sport that stems from basketball  has been played since 1907.  the sport is now promoted in south africa  namibia  botswana  lesotho  india  and mauritius to establish ringball as an international sport. korfball (dutch  korfbal  korf meaning  basket ) started in the netherlands and is now played worldwide as a mixed gender team ball game  similar to mixed netball and basketball netball (formerly known as women basketball but now played by both males and females)  a limited-contact team sport in which two teams of seven try to score points against one another by placing a ball through a high hoop. australia new zealand champions (so called anz championship) is very famous in australia and new zealand as the premier netball league.   == social forms of basketball ==  basketball has been adopted by various social groups  which have established their own environments and sometimes their own rules. such socialized forms of basketball include the following.   === recreational basketball === basketball is played widely casually in schools and colleges where fun  entertainment and camaraderie rule rather than winning a game.  basketball schools and academies  where students are trained in developing basketball fundamentals  undergo fitness and endurance exercises and learn various basketball skills. basketball students learn proper ways of passing  ball handling  dribbling  shooting from various distances  rebounding  offensive moves  defense  layups  screens  basketball rules and basketball ethics. also popular are the basketball camps organized for various occasions  often to
get prepared for basketball events  and basketball clinics for improving skills. college and university basketball played in educational institutions of higher learning. this includes national collegiate athletic association (ncaa) intercollegiate basketball.   === disabled basketball === disabled basketball is played by various disabled groups  such as the deaf and physically crippled people.  deaf basketball - one of several deaf sports   deaf basketball relies on signing for communication. any deaf sporting event that happens  its purpose is to serve as a catalyst for the socialization of a low-incidence and geographically dispersed population. wheelchair basketball - a sport based on basketball but designed for disabled people in wheelchairs and considered one of the major disabled sports practiced.there is a functional classification system that is used to help determine if the wheelchair basketball player classification system reflects the existing differences in the performance of elite female players. what this system does is it gives an analysis of the players  functional resources through field-testing and game observation. during this system s process  players are assigned a score of 1 to 4.5.   === ethnic and religion-based basketball === examples of ethnic basketball include indo-pak or russian or armenian leagues in the united states or canada  for example  or filipino expatriate basketball leagues in the gulf or the united states. religion-based basketball includes  most notably  church-related christian basketball leagues  jewish  muslim and hindu basketball leagues  and so on. or denominational leagues like coptic  syriac/assyrian basketball leagues in the united states or canada.   === prison basketball === prison basketball is practiced in prisons and penitentiary institutions. active religious basketball missionary groups also play basketball with prisoners. some prisons have developed their own prison basketball leagues. at times  non-prisoners may play in such leagues  provided all home and away games are played within prison courts. film director jason moriarty has released a documentary relating to the sport  entitled prison ball. prison systems in the united states makes about $74 billion a year. the reason why prisons make so much money in a year is the fact that over 2.3 million americans are currently incarcerated. it all started in 1972  the number of people in the united states prison has increased over 700% and now charges the taxpayer $39 billion to maintain every year. us population is only a little smaller than countries like iceland  estonia and cyprus combined  so it was not a surprise that the us penal system has developed its own type of subculture. there is a lot of people that when they hear  correctional facility  think about men behind bars and playing card and lifting weights in the yard. that s almost correct but most people don t know that there is a wide range of athletic opportunities available in today s penitentiaries. prison leagues are becoming the best way and most popular way inmates spend their time. for younger offenders  basketball is a good way to
get their lives back on track  but for long term prisoners  these basketball leagues are a great way for them to get away from all their daily problems. some prison leagues sometimes get blessed with their own celebrities.  pee wee  kirkland who was drafted by the chicago bulls  but turned it down because he was making way more money in the drug world. eventually caught up and arrested  he then found himself playing in the anthracite basketball league  representing lewis-burgh penitentiary. also  another celebrity michael vick used the football prison league to stay in shape. some other big names that played in prison basketball leagues are allen iverson  jr smith and plaxico burress  for some prison leagues can be a valuable training ground.   === show basketball === show basketball is performed by entertainment basketball show teams  the prime example being the harlem globetrotters. there are even specialized entertainment teams  such as teams of celebrities  people with short heights and others.  celebrity basketball teams made of celebrities (actors  singers  and so on.) playing in their own leagues or in public  often for entertainment and charity events  midget basketball teams made up of athletes of short stature offering shows using basketball  slamball offered as entertainment events. slamball is a very intense form of basketball game actually it is an elevated game of basketball that is infused with football tactics and involves bouncing of a trampolines. this game is very popular in places like europe and australia  this intense game is full of contact just like football the trampolines are embedded in the floor around the baskets. the objective of the game is just like any sport you have to score points by getting the ball into the basket  this is mostly done by the player using the trampoline to go fly high in the air to come down with slam dunk. not only do they use tactics from football but they also do the same style of substitution as hockey well you can say it s very similar. the potions of slamball are stopper  gunner and handler. the stopper is the defender and is in control of the whole defensive plan. the handler is basically the point guard of the game  their in control of setting plays on the offensive end and helps a little on defensive end as well. the last position the gunner is the one that does most of the scoring and all also helps out on the defensive end.   === other forms === gay basketball played in lgbtqia+ communities in gay basketball leagues. the sport of basketball is a major part of events during the gay games  world outgames and eurogames. midnight basketball  a basketball initiative to curb inner-city crime in the united states and elsewhere by keeping urban youth off the streets and engaging them with sports alternatives to drugs and crime. mini basketball played by underage children. maxi basketball
played by more elderly individuals. rezball  short for reservation ball  is the avid native american following of basketball  particularly a style of play particular to native american teams of some areas. school or high school basketball  the sport of basketball being one of the most frequently exercised and popular sports in all school systems.   == fantasy basketball ==  fantasy basketball was popularized during the 1990s after the advent of the internet. those who play this game are sometimes referred to as general managers  who draft actual nba players and compute their basketball statistics. the game was popularized by espn fantasy sports  nba.com  and yahoo  fantasy sports. other sports websites provided the same format keeping the game interesting with participants actually owning specific players.   == see also ==   == notes ==   == references ==  general references   == further reading ==   == external links ==  historicalbasketball hall of fame – springfield  ma national basketball foundation—runs the naismith museum in ontario hometown sports heroesorganizationsbasketball at the olympic games international basketball federation national basketball association women s national basketball association continental basketball association (oldest professional basketball league in the world) national wheelchair basketball associationother sources basketball . encyclopædia britannica online. basketball at curlie eurobasket website basketball-reference.com  basketball statistics  analysis and history ontario s historical plaques – dr. james naismith (1861–1939)
baseball is a bat-and-ball game played between two opposing teams who take turns batting and fielding. the game proceeds when a player on the fielding team  called the pitcher  throws a ball which a player on the batting team tries to hit with a bat. the objective of the offensive team (batting team) is to hit the ball into the field of play  allowing its players to run the bases  having them advance counter-clockwise around four bases to score what are called  runs . the objective of the defensive team (fielding team) is to prevent batters from becoming runners  and to prevent runners  advance around the bases. a run is scored when a runner legally advances around the bases in order and touches home plate (the place where the player started as a batter). the team that scores the most runs by the end of the game is the winner. the first objective of the batting team is to have a player reach first base safely. a player on the batting team who reaches first base without being called  out  can attempt to advance to subsequent bases as a runner  either immediately or during teammates  turns batting. the fielding team tries to prevent runs by getting batters or runners  out  which forces them out of the field of play. both the pitcher and fielders have methods of getting the batting team s players out. the opposing teams switch back and forth between batting and fielding  the batting team s turn to bat is over once the fielding team records three outs. one turn batting for each team constitutes an inning. a game is usually composed of nine innings  and the team with the greater number of runs at the end of the game wins. if scores are tied at the end of nine innings  extra innings are usually played. baseball has no game clock  although most games end in the ninth inning. baseball evolved from older bat-and-ball games already being played in england by the mid-18th century. this game was brought by immigrants to north america  where the modern version developed. by the late 19th century  baseball was widely recognized as the national sport of the united states. baseball is popular in north america and parts of central and south america  the caribbean  and east asia  particularly in japan  south korea and taiwan. in the united states and canada  professional major league baseball (mlb) teams are divided into the national league (nl) and american league (al)  each with three divisions  east  west  and central. the mlb champion is determined by playoffs that culminate in the world series. the top level of play is similarly split in japan between the central and pacific leagues and in cuba between the west league and east league. the world baseball classic  organized by the world baseball softball confederation  is the major international competition of the sport
and attracts the top national teams from around the world.   == rules and gameplay ==  a baseball game is played between two teams  each composed of nine players  that take turns playing offense (batting and baserunning) and defense (pitching and fielding). a pair of turns  one at bat and one in the field  by each team constitutes an inning. a game consists of nine innings (seven innings at the high school level and in doubleheaders in college and minor leagues  and six innings at the little league level). one team—customarily the visiting team—bats in the top  or first half  of every inning. the other team—customarily the home team—bats in the bottom  or second half  of every inning. the goal of the game is to score more points (runs) than the other team. the players on the team at bat attempt to score runs by touching all four bases  in order  set at the corners of the square-shaped baseball diamond. a player bats at home plate and must attempt to safely reach a base before proceeding  counterclockwise  from first base  to second base  third base  and back home to score a run. the team in the field attempts to prevent runs from scoring by recording outs  which remove opposing players from offensive action  until their next turn at bat comes up again. when three outs are recorded  the teams switch roles for the next half-inning. if the score of the game is tied after nine innings  extra innings are played to resolve the contest. many amateur games  particularly unorganized ones  involve different numbers of players and innings.the game is played on a field whose primary boundaries  the foul lines  extend forward from home plate at 45-degree angles. the 90-degree area within the foul lines is referred to as fair territory  the 270-degree area outside them is foul territory. the part of the field enclosed by the bases and several yards beyond them is the infield  the area farther beyond the infield is the outfield. in the middle of the infield is a raised pitcher s mound  with a rectangular rubber plate (the rubber) at its center. the outer boundary of the outfield is typically demarcated by a raised fence  which may be of any material and height. the fair territory between home plate and the outfield boundary is baseball s field of play  though significant events can take place in foul territory  as well.there are three basic tools of baseball  the ball  the bat  and the glove or mitt   the baseball is about the size of an adult s fist  around 9 inches (23 centimeters) in circumference. it has a rubber or cork center  wound in yarn and covered in white cowhide  with red stitching. the bat is a hitting tool  traditionally made of a single  solid piece of wood.
other materials are now commonly used for nonprofessional games. it is a hard round stick  about 2.5 inches (6.4 centimeters) in diameter at the hitting end  tapering to a narrower handle and culminating in a knob. bats used by adults are typically around 34 inches (86 centimeters) long  and not longer than 42 inches (106 centimeters). the glove or mitt is a fielding tool  made of padded leather with webbing between the fingers. as an aid in catching and holding onto the ball  it takes various shapes to meet the specific needs of different fielding positions.protective helmets are also standard equipment for all batters.at the beginning of each half-inning  the nine players of the fielding team arrange themselves around the field. one of them  the pitcher  stands on the pitcher s mound. the pitcher begins the pitching delivery with one foot on the rubber  pushing off it to gain velocity when throwing toward home plate. another fielding team player  the catcher  squats on the far side of home plate  facing the pitcher. the rest of the fielding team faces home plate  typically arranged as four infielders—who set up along or within a few yards outside the imaginary lines (basepaths) between first  second  and third base—and three outfielders. in the standard arrangement  there is a first baseman positioned several steps to the left of first base  a second baseman to the right of second base  a shortstop to the left of second base  and a third baseman to the right of third base. the basic outfield positions are left fielder  center fielder  and right fielder. with the exception of the catcher  all fielders are required to be in fair territory when the pitch is delivered. a neutral umpire sets up behind the catcher. other umpires will be distributed around the field as well.  play starts with a member of the batting team  the batter  standing at home plate  holding a bat. the batter waits for the pitcher to throw a pitch (the ball) toward home plate  and attempts to hit the ball with the bat. the catcher catches pitches that the batter does not hit—as a result of either electing not to swing or failing to connect—and returns them to the pitcher. a batter who hits the ball into the field of play must drop the bat and begin running toward first base  at which point the player is referred to as a runner (or  until the play is over  a batter-runner). a batter-runner who reaches first base without being put out is said to be safe and is on base. a batter-runner may choose to remain at first base or attempt to advance to second base or even beyond—however far the player believes can be reached safely. a player who reaches base despite proper play by the fielders has recorded a hit. a player who reaches first base safely on a hit
is credited with a single. if a player makes it to second base safely as a direct result of a hit  it is a double  third base  a triple. if the ball is hit in the air within the foul lines over the entire outfield (and outfield fence  if there is one)  or otherwise safely circles all the bases  it is a home run  the batter and any runners on base may all freely circle the bases  each scoring a run. this is the most desirable result for the batter. a player who reaches base due to a fielding mistake is not credited with a hit—instead  the responsible fielder is charged with an error.any runners already on base may attempt to advance on batted balls that land  or contact the ground  in fair territory  before or after the ball lands. a runner on first base must attempt to advance if a ball lands in play. if a ball hit into play rolls foul before passing through the infield  it becomes dead and any runners must return to the base they occupied when the play began. if the ball is hit in the air and caught before it lands  the batter has flied out and any runners on base may attempt to advance only if they tag up (contact the base they occupied when the play began  as or after the ball is caught). runners may also attempt to advance to the next base while the pitcher is in the process of delivering the ball to home plate  a successful effort is a stolen base.a pitch that is not hit into the field of play is called either a strike or a ball. a batter against whom three strikes are recorded strikes out. a batter against whom four balls are recorded is awarded a base on balls or walk  a free advance to first base. (a batter may also freely advance to first base if the batter s body or uniform is struck by a pitch outside the strike zone  provided the batter does not swing and attempts to avoid being hit.) crucial to determining balls and strikes is the umpire s judgment as to whether a pitch has passed through the strike zone  a conceptual area above home plate extending from the midpoint between the batter s shoulders and belt down to the hollow of the knee.  while the team at bat is trying to score runs  the team in the field is attempting to record outs. in addition to the strikeout  common ways a member of the batting team may be put out include the flyout  ground out  force out  and tag out. it is possible to record two outs in the course of the same play. this is called a double play. three outs in one play  a triple play  is possible  though rare. players put out or retired must leave the
field  returning to their team s dugout or bench. a runner may be stranded on base when a third out is recorded against another player on the team. stranded runners do not benefit the team in its next turn at bat as every half-inning begins with the bases empty.an individual player s turn batting or plate appearance is complete when the player reaches base  hits a home run  makes an out  or hits a ball that results in the team s third out  even if it is recorded against a teammate. on rare occasions  a batter may be at the plate when  without the batter s hitting the ball  a third out is recorded against a teammate—for instance  a runner getting caught stealing (tagged out attempting to steal a base). a batter with this sort of incomplete plate appearance starts off the team s next turn batting  any balls or strikes recorded against the batter the previous inning are erased. a runner may circle the bases only once per plate appearance and thus can score at most a single run per batting turn. once a player has completed a plate appearance  that player may not bat again until the eight other members of the player s team have all taken their turn at bat in the batting order. the batting order is set before the game begins  and may not be altered except for substitutions. once a player has been removed for a substitute  that player may not reenter the game. children s games often have more lenient rules  such as little league rules  which allow players to be substituted back into the same game.if the designated hitter (dh) rule is in effect  each team has a tenth player whose sole responsibility is to bat (and run). the dh takes the place of another player—almost invariably the pitcher—in the batting order  but does not field. thus  even with the dh  each team still has a batting order of nine players and a fielding arrangement of nine players.   == personnel ==   === players ===  the number of players on a baseball roster  or squad  varies by league and by the level of organized play. a major league baseball (mlb) team has a roster of 25 players with specific roles. a typical roster features the following players  eight position players  the catcher  four infielders  and three outfielders—all of whom play on a regular basis five starting pitchers who constitute the team s pitching rotation or starting rotation six relief pitchers  including one closer  who constitute the team s bullpen (named for the off-field area where pitchers warm up) one backup  or substitute  catcher two backup infielders two backup outfielders one pinch hitter  or a utility player  or a seventh relievermost baseball leagues worldwide have the dh rule  including mlb s american league  japan s pacific league
 and caribbean professional leagues  along with major american amateur organizations. the central league in japan and the national league do not have the rule  and high-level minor league clubs connected to national league teams are not required to field a dh. in leagues that apply the designated hitter rule  a typical team has nine offensive regulars (including the dh)  five starting pitchers  seven or eight relievers  a backup catcher  and two or three other reserve players.   === other === the manager  or head coach  oversees the team s major strategic decisions  such as establishing the starting rotation  setting the lineup  or batting order  before each game  and making substitutions during games—in particular  bringing in relief pitchers. managers are typically assisted by two or more coaches  they may have specialized responsibilities  such as working with players on hitting  fielding  pitching  or strength and conditioning. at most levels of organized play  two coaches are stationed on the field when the team is at bat  the first base coach and third base coach  whom occupy designated coaches  boxes  just outside the foul lines. these coaches assist in the direction of baserunners  when the ball is in play  and relay tactical signals from the manager to batters and runners  during pauses in play. in contrast to many other team sports  baseball managers and coaches generally wear their team s uniforms  coaches must be in uniform to be allowed on the field to confer with players during a game.any baseball game involves one or more umpires  who make rulings on the outcome of each play. at a minimum  one umpire will stand behind the catcher  to have a good view of the strike zone  and call balls and strikes. additional umpires may be stationed near the other bases  thus making it easier to judge plays such as attempted force outs and tag outs. in mlb  four umpires are used for each game  one near each base. in the playoffs  six umpires are used  one at each base and two in the outfield along the foul lines.   == strategy and tactics ==  many of the pre-game and in-game strategic decisions in baseball revolve around a fundamental fact  in general  right-handed batters tend to be more successful against left-handed pitchers and  to an even greater degree  left-handed batters tend to be more successful against right-handed pitchers. a manager with several left-handed batters in the regular lineup  who knows the team will be facing a left-handed starting pitcher  may respond by starting one or more of the right-handed backups on the team s roster. during the late innings of a game  as relief pitchers and pinch hitters are brought in  the opposing managers will often go back and forth trying to create favorable matchups with their substitutions.
the manager of the fielding team trying to arrange same-handed pitcher-batter matchups and the manager of the batting team trying to arrange opposite-handed matchups. with a team that has the lead in the late innings  a manager may remove a starting position player—especially one whose turn at bat is not likely to come up again—for a more skillful fielder (known as a defensive substitution).   === pitching and fielding tactics ===  the tactical decision that precedes almost every play in a baseball game involves pitch selection. by gripping and then releasing the baseball in a certain manner  and by throwing it at a certain speed  pitchers can cause the baseball to break to either side  or downward  as it approaches the batter  thus creating differing pitches that can be selected. among the resulting wide variety of pitches that may be thrown  the four basic types are the fastball  the changeup (or off-speed pitch)  and two breaking balls—the curveball and the slider. pitchers have different repertoires of pitches they are skillful at throwing. conventionally  before each pitch  the catcher signals the pitcher what type of pitch to throw  as well as its general vertical and/or horizontal location. if there is disagreement on the selection  the pitcher may shake off the sign and the catcher will call for a different pitch.  with a runner on base and taking a lead  the pitcher may attempt a pickoff  a quick throw to a fielder covering the base to keep the runner s lead in check or  optimally  effect a tag out. pickoff attempts  however  are subject to rules that severely restrict the pitcher s movements before and during the pickoff attempt. violation of any one of these rules could result in the umpire calling a balk against the pitcher  which permits any runners on base to advance one base with impunity. if an attempted stolen base is anticipated  the catcher may call for a pitchout  a ball thrown deliberately off the plate  allowing the catcher to catch it while standing and throw quickly to a base. facing a batter with a strong tendency to hit to one side of the field  the fielding team may employ a shift  with most or all of the fielders moving to the left or right of their usual positions. with a runner on third base  the infielders may play in  moving closer to home plate to improve the odds of throwing out the runner on a ground ball  though a sharply hit grounder is more likely to carry through a drawn-in infield.   === batting and baserunning tactics === several basic offensive tactics come into play with a runner on first base  including the fundamental choice of whether to attempt a steal of second base. the hit and run is sometimes employed  with a skillful contact hitter  the runner takes off with the pitch 
drawing the shortstop or second baseman over to second base  creating a gap in the infield for the batter to poke the ball through. the sacrifice bunt  calls for the batter to focus on making soft contact with the ball  so that it rolls a short distance into the infield  allowing the runner to advance into scoring position as the batter is thrown out at first. a batter  particularly one who is a fast runner  may also attempt to bunt for a hit. a sacrifice bunt employed with a runner on third base  aimed at bringing that runner home  is known as a squeeze play. with a runner on third and fewer than two outs  a batter may instead concentrate on hitting a fly ball that  even if it is caught  will be deep enough to allow the runner to tag up and score—a successful batter  in this case  gets credit for a sacrifice fly. the manager will sometimes signal a batter who is ahead in the count (i.e.  has more balls than strikes) to take  or not swing at  the next pitch.   == history ==  the evolution of baseball from older bat-and-ball games is difficult to trace with precision. consensus once held that today s baseball is a north american development from the older game rounders  popular among children in great britain and ireland. baseball before we knew it  a search for the roots of the game (2005)  by american baseball historian david block  suggests that the game originated in england  recently uncovered historical evidence supports this position. block argues that rounders and early baseball were actually regional variants of each other  and that the game s most direct antecedents are the english games of stoolball and  tut-ball . the earliest known reference to baseball is in a 1744 british publication  a little pretty pocket-book  by john newbery. block discovered that the first recorded game of  bass-ball  took place in 1749 in surrey  and featured the prince of wales as a player. this early form of the game was apparently brought to canada by english immigrants.by the early 1830s  there were reports of a variety of uncodified bat-and-ball games recognizable as early forms of baseball being played around north america. the first officially recorded baseball game on this continent was played in beachville  ontario  canada on june 4  1838. in 1845  alexander cartwright  a member of new york city s knickerbocker club  led the codification of the so-called knickerbocker rules. while there are reports that the new york knickerbockers played games in 1845  the contest long recognized as the first officially recorded baseball game in u.s. history took place on june 19  1846  in hoboken  new jersey  the  new york nine  defeated the knickerbockers  23–1  in four innings. with the knickerbocker code as the
basis  the rules of modern baseball continued to evolve over the next half-century.   === in the united states ===   ==== establishment of professional leagues ==== in the mid-1850s  a baseball craze hit the new york metropolitan area  and by 1856  local journals were referring to baseball as the  national pastime  or  national game . a year later  the sport s first governing body  the national association of base ball players  was formed. in 1867  it barred participation by african americans. the more formally structured national league was founded in 1876. professional negro leagues formed  but quickly folded. in 1887  softball  under the name of indoor baseball or indoor-outdoor  was invented as a winter version of the parent game. the national league s first successful counterpart  the american league  which evolved from the minor western league  was established in 1893  and virtually all of the modern baseball rules were in place by then.the national agreement of 1903 formalized relations both between the two major leagues and between them and the national association of professional base ball leagues  representing most of the country s minor professional leagues. the world series  pitting the two major league champions against each other  was inaugurated that fall.  the black sox scandal of the 1919 world series led to the formation of a new national commission of baseball that drew the two major leagues closer together. the first major league baseball commissioner  kenesaw mountain landis  was elected in 1920. that year also saw the founding of the negro national league  the first significant negro league  it would operate until 1931. for part of the 1920s  it was joined by the eastern colored league.   ==== rise of ruth and racial integration ==== compared with the present  professional baseball in the early 20th century was lower-scoring  and pitchers were more dominant. the so-called dead-ball era ended in the early 1920s with several changes in rule and circumstance that were advantageous to hitters. strict new regulations governed the ball s size  shape and composition  along with a new rule officially banning the spitball and other pitches that depended on the ball being treated or roughed-up with foreign substances  resulted in a ball that traveled farther when hit. the rise of the legendary player babe ruth  the first great power hitter of the new era  helped permanently alter the nature of the game. in the late 1920s and early 1930s  st. louis cardinals general manager branch rickey invested in several minor league clubs and developed the first modern farm system. a new negro national league was organized in 1933  four years later  it was joined by the negro american league. the first elections to the national baseball hall of fame took place in 1936. in 1939  little league baseball was founded in pennsylvania.  a large number of
minor league teams disbanded when world war ii led to a player shortage. chicago cubs owner philip k. wrigley led the formation of the all-american girls professional baseball league to help keep the game in the public eye. the first crack in the unwritten agreement barring blacks from white-controlled professional ball occurred in 1945  jackie robinson was signed by the national league s brooklyn dodgers and began playing for their minor league team in montreal. in 1947  robinson broke the major leagues  color barrier when he debuted with the dodgers. latin american players  largely overlooked before  also started entering the majors in greater numbers. in 1951  two chicago white sox  venezuelan-born chico carrasquel and black cuban-born minnie miñoso  became the first hispanic all-stars. integration proceeded slowly  by 1953  only six of the 16 major league teams had a black player on the roster.   ==== attendance records and the age of steroids ==== in 1975  the union s power—and players  salaries—began to increase greatly when the reserve clause was effectively struck down  leading to the free agency system. significant work stoppages occurred in 1981 and 1994  the latter forcing the cancellation of the world series for the first time in 90 years. attendance had been growing steadily since the mid-1970s and in 1994  before the stoppage  the majors were setting their all-time record for per-game attendance. after play resumed in 1995  non-division-winning wild card teams became a permanent fixture of the post-season. regular-season interleague play was introduced in 1997 and the second-highest attendance mark for a full season was set. in 2000  the national and american leagues were dissolved as legal entities. while their identities were maintained for scheduling purposes (and the designated hitter distinction)  the regulations and other functions—such as player discipline and umpire supervision—they had administered separately were consolidated under the rubric of mlb.in 2001  barry bonds established the current record of 73 home runs in a single season. there had long been suspicions that the dramatic increase in power hitting was fueled in large part by the abuse of illegal steroids (as well as by the dilution of pitching talent due to expansion)  but the issue only began attracting significant media attention in 2002 and there was no penalty for the use of performance-enhancing drugs before 2004. in 2007  bonds became mlb s all-time home run leader  surpassing hank aaron  as total major league and minor league attendance both reached all-time highs.   === around the world ===  widely known as america s pastime  baseball is well established in several other countries as well. as early as 1877  a professional league  the international association  featured teams from both canada and the us. while baseball is widely played in canada and many minor league teams have been based in the country  the american major leagues did not include a canadian club until 1969  when the montreal expos
joined the national league as an expansion team. in 1977  the expansion toronto blue jays joined the american league.  in 1847  american soldiers played what may have been the first baseball game in mexico at parque los berros in xalapa  veracruz. the first formal baseball league outside of the united states and canada was founded in 1878 in cuba  which maintains a rich baseball tradition. the dominican republic held its first islandwide championship tournament in 1912. professional baseball tournaments and leagues began to form in other countries between the world wars  including the netherlands (formed in 1922)  australia (1934)  japan (1936)  mexico (1937)  and puerto rico (1938). the japanese major leagues have long been considered the highest quality professional circuits outside of the united states.after world war ii  professional leagues were founded in many latin american countries  most prominently venezuela (1946) and the dominican republic (1955). since the early 1970s  the annual caribbean series has matched the championship clubs from the four leading latin american winter leagues  the dominican professional baseball league  mexican pacific league  puerto rican professional baseball league  and venezuelan professional baseball league. in asia  south korea (1982)  taiwan (1990) and china (2003) all have professional leagues.many european countries have professional leagues as well  the most successful  other than the dutch league  is the italian league  founded in 1948. in 2004  australia won a surprise silver medal at the olympic games. the confédération européene de baseball (european baseball confederation)  founded in 1953  organizes a number of competitions between clubs from different countries. other competitions between national teams  such as the baseball world cup and the olympic baseball tournament  were administered by the international baseball federation (ibaf) from its formation in 1938 until its 2013 merger with the international softball federation to create the current joint governing body for both sports  the world baseball softball confederation (wbsc).  women s baseball is played on an organized amateur basis in numerous countries.after being admitted to the olympics as a medal sport beginning with the 1992 games  baseball was dropped from the 2012 summer olympic games at the 2005 international olympic committee meeting. it remained part of the 2008 games. while the sport s lack of a following in much of the world was a factor  more important was mlb s reluctance to allow its players to participate during the major league season. mlb initiated the world baseball classic  scheduled to precede its season  partly as a replacement  high-profile international tournament. the inaugural classic  held in march 2006  was the first tournament involving national teams to feature a significant number of mlb participants. the baseball world cup was discontinued after its 2011 edition in favor of an expanded world baseball classic.   == distinctive elements == baseball has certain attributes that set it apart from the other popular team sports in the countries where it has
a following. all of these sports use a clock play is less individual  and the variation between playing fields is not as substantial or important. the comparison between cricket and baseball demonstrates that many of baseball s distinctive elements are shared in various ways with its cousin sports.   === no clock to kill ===  in clock-limited sports  games often end with a team that holds the lead killing the clock rather than competing aggressively against the opposing team. in contrast  baseball has no clock  thus a team cannot win without getting the last batter out and rallies are not constrained by time. at almost any turn in any baseball game  the most advantageous strategy is some form of aggressive strategy. whereas  in the case of multi-day test and first-class cricket  the possibility of a draw often encourages a team that is batting last and well behind  to bat defensively and run out the clock  giving up any faint chance at a win  to avoid an overall loss.while nine innings has been the standard since the beginning of professional baseball  the duration of the average major league game has increased steadily through the years. at the turn of the 20th century  games typically took an hour and a half to play. in the 1920s  they averaged just less than two hours  which eventually ballooned to 2 38 in 1960. by 1997  the average american league game lasted 2 57 (national league games were about 10 minutes shorter—pitchers at the plate making for quicker outs than designated hitters). in 2004  major league baseball declared that its goal was an average game of 2 45. by 2014  though  the average mlb game took over three hours to complete. the lengthening of games is attributed to longer breaks between half-innings for television commercials  increased offense  more pitching changes  and a slower pace of play with pitchers taking more time between each delivery  and batters stepping out of the box more frequently. other leagues have experienced similar issues. in 2008  nippon professional baseball took steps aimed at shortening games by 12 minutes from the preceding decade s average of 3 18.in 2016  the average nine-inning playoff game in major league baseball was 3 hours and 35 minutes. this was up 10 minutes from 2015 and 21 minutes from 2014.   === individual focus ===  although baseball is a team sport  individual players are often placed under scrutiny and pressure. in 1915  a baseball instructional manual pointed out that every single pitch  of which there are often more than two hundred in a game  involves an individual  one-on-one contest   the pitcher and the batter in a battle of wits . pitcher  batter  and fielder all act essentially independent of each other. while coaching staffs can signal pitcher or batter to pursue certain tactics  the execution of the play itself
is a series of solitary acts. if the batter hits a line drive  the outfielder is solely responsible for deciding to try to catch it or play it on the bounce and for succeeding or failing. the statistical precision of baseball is both facilitated by this isolation and reinforces it. cricket is more similar to baseball than many other team sports in this regard  while the individual focus in cricket is mitigated by the importance of the batting partnership and the practicalities of tandem running  it is enhanced by the fact that a batsman may occupy the wicket for an hour or much more. there is no statistical equivalent in cricket for the fielding error and thus less emphasis on personal responsibility in this area of play.   === uniqueness of each baseball park ===  unlike those of most sports  baseball playing fields can vary significantly in size and shape. while the dimensions of the infield are specifically regulated  the only constraint on outfield size and shape for professional teams  following the rules of mlb and minor league baseball  is that fields built or remodeled since june 1  1958  must have a minimum distance of 325 feet (99 m) from home plate to the fences in left and right field and 400 feet (122 m) to center. major league teams often skirt even this rule. for example  at minute maid park  which became the home of the houston astros in 2000  the crawford boxes in left field are only 315 feet (96 m) from home plate. there are no rules at all that address the height of fences or other structures at the edge of the outfield. the most famously idiosyncratic outfield boundary is the left-field wall at boston s fenway park  in use since 1912  the green monster is 310 feet (94 m) from home plate down the line and 37 feet (11 m) tall.similarly  there are no regulations at all concerning the dimensions of foul territory. thus a foul fly ball may be entirely out of play in a park with little space between the foul lines and the stands  but a foulout in a park with more expansive foul ground. a fence in foul territory that is close to the outfield line will tend to direct balls that strike it back toward the fielders  while one that is farther away may actually prompt more collisions  as outfielders run full speed to field balls deep in the corner. these variations can make the difference between a double and a triple or inside-the-park home run. the surface of the field is also unregulated. while the adjacent image shows a traditional field surfacing arrangement (and the one used by virtually all mlb teams with naturally surfaced fields)  teams are free to decide what areas will be grassed or bare. some fields—including several in mlb—use an artificial surface  such as astroturf. surface variations can have a significant effect on how ground
balls behave and are fielded as well as on baserunning. similarly  the presence of a roof (seven major league teams play in stadiums with permanent or retractable roofs) can greatly affect how fly balls are played. while football and soccer players deal with similar variations of field surface and stadium covering  the size and shape of their fields are much more standardized. the area out-of-bounds on a football or soccer field does not affect play the way foul territory in baseball does  so variations in that regard are largely insignificant.  these physical variations create a distinctive set of playing conditions at each ballpark. other local factors  such as altitude and climate  can also significantly affect play. a given stadium may acquire a reputation as a pitcher s park or a hitter s park  if one or the other discipline notably benefits from its unique mix of elements. the most exceptional park in this regard is coors field  home of the colorado rockies. its high altitude—5 282 feet (1 610 m) above sea level—is partly responsible for giving it the strongest hitter s park effect in the major leagues due to the low air pressure. wrigley field  home of the chicago cubs  is known for its fickle disposition  a hitter s park when the strong winds off lake michigan are blowing out  it becomes more of a pitcher s park when they are blowing in. the absence of a standardized field affects not only how particular games play out  but the nature of team rosters and players  statistical records. for example  hitting a fly ball 330 feet (100 m) into right field might result in an easy catch on the warning track at one park  and a home run at another. a team that plays in a park with a relatively short right field  such as the new york yankees  will tend to stock its roster with left-handed pull hitters  who can best exploit it. on the individual level  a player who spends most of his career with a team that plays in a hitter s park will gain an advantage in batting statistics over time—even more so if his talents are especially suited to the park.   == statistics ==  organized baseball lends itself to statistics to a greater degree than many other sports. each play is discrete and has a relatively small number of possible outcomes. in the late 19th century  a former cricket player  english-born henry chadwick of brooklyn  was responsible for the  development of the box score  tabular standings  the annual baseball guide  the batting average  and most of the common statistics and tables used to describe baseball.  the statistical record is so central to the game s  historical essence  that chadwick came to be known as father baseball. in the 1920s  american newspapers began devoting more and more attention to baseball statistics  initiating
what journalist and historian alan schwarz describes as a  tectonic shift in sports  as intrigue that once focused mostly on teams began to go to individual players and their statistics lines. the official baseball rules administered by mlb require the official scorer to categorize each baseball play unambiguously. the rules provide detailed criteria to promote consistency. the score report is the official basis for both the box score of the game and the relevant statistical records. general managers  managers  and baseball scouts use statistics to evaluate players and make strategic decisions.  certain traditional statistics are familiar to most baseball fans. the basic batting statistics include  at bats  plate appearances  excluding walks and hit by pitches—where the batter s ability is not fully tested—and sacrifices and sacrifice flies—where the batter intentionally makes an out in order to advance one or more baserunners hits  times a base is reached safely  because of a batted  fair ball without a fielding error or fielder s choice runs  times circling the bases and reaching home safely runs batted in (rbis)  number of runners who scored due to a batter s action (including the batter  in the case of a home run)  except when batter grounded into double play or reached on an error home runs  hits on which the batter successfully touched all four bases  without the contribution of a fielding error batting average  hits divided by at bats—the traditional measure of batting abilitythe basic baserunning statistics include  stolen bases  times advancing to the next base entirely due to the runner s own efforts  generally while the pitcher is preparing to deliver or delivering the ball caught stealing  times tagged out while attempting to steal a base the basic pitching statistics include  wins  credited to pitcher on winning team who last pitched before the team took a lead that it never relinquished (a starting pitcher must pitch at least five innings to qualify for a win) losses  charged to pitcher on losing team who was pitching when the opposing team took a lead that it never relinquished saves  games where the pitcher enters a game led by the pitcher s team  finishes the game without surrendering the lead  is not the winning pitcher  and either (a) the lead was three runs or less when the pitcher entered the game  (b) the potential tying run was on base  at bat  or on deck  or (c) the pitcher pitched three or more innings innings pitched  outs recorded while pitching divided by three (partial innings are conventionally recorded as  e.g.   5.2  or  7.1  the last digit actually representing thirds  not tenths  of an inning) strikeouts  times pitching three strikes to a batter winning percentage  wins divided by decisions (wins plus losses) earned run average (era)  runs allowed  excluding those resulting from fielding errors 
per nine innings pitchedthe basic fielding statistics include  putouts  times the fielder catches a fly ball  tags or forces out a runner  or otherwise directly effects an out assists  times a putout by another fielder was recorded following the fielder touching the ball errors  times the fielder fails to make a play that should have been made with common effort  and the batting team benefits as a result total chances  putouts plus assists plus errors fielding average  successful chances (putouts plus assists) divided by total chancesamong the many other statistics that are kept are those collectively known as situational statistics. for example  statistics can indicate which specific pitchers a certain batter performs best against. if a given situation statistically favors a certain batter  the manager of the fielding team may be more likely to change pitchers or have the pitcher intentionally walk the batter in order to face one who is less likely to succeed.   === sabermetrics === sabermetrics refers to the field of baseball statistical study and the development of new statistics and analytical tools. the term is also used to refer directly to new statistics themselves. the term was coined around 1980 by one of the field s leading proponents  bill james  and derives from the society for american baseball research (sabr).the growing popularity of sabermetrics since the early 1980s has brought more attention to two batting statistics that sabermetricians argue are much better gauges of a batter s skill than batting average  on-base percentage measures a batter s ability to get on base. it is calculated by taking the sum of the batter s successes in getting on base (hits plus walks plus hit by pitches) and dividing that by the batter s total plate appearances (at bats plus walks plus hit by pitches plus sacrifice flies)  except for sacrifice bunts. slugging percentage measures a batter s ability to hit for power. it is calculated by taking the batter s total bases (one per each single  two per double  three per triple  and four per home run) and dividing that by the batter s at bats.some of the new statistics devised by sabermetricians have gained wide use   on-base plus slugging (ops) measures a batter s overall ability. it is calculated by adding the batter s on-base percentage and slugging percentage. walks plus hits per inning pitched (whip) measures a pitcher s ability at preventing hitters from reaching base. it is calculated exactly as its name suggests.   == popularity and cultural impact ==  writing in 1919  philosopher morris raphael cohen described baseball as america s national religion. in the words of sports columnist jayson stark  baseball has long been  a unique paragon of american culture —a status he sees as devastated by the steroid abuse scandal. baseball has an important place in other national cultures as well  scholar peter bjarkman describes  how deeply the sport is ingrained in the history
and culture of a nation such as cuba  [and] how thoroughly it was radically reshaped and nativized in japan.  since the early 1980s  the dominican republic  in particular the city of san pedro de macorís  has been the major leagues  primary source of foreign talent. in 2017  83 of the 868 players on mlb opening day rosters (and disabled lists) were from the country. among other caribbean countries and territories  a combined 97 mlb players were born in venezuela  cuba  and puerto rico. hall-of-famer roberto clemente remains one of the greatest national heroes in puerto rico s history. while baseball has long been the island s primary athletic pastime  its once well-attended professional winter league has declined in popularity since 1990  when young puerto rican players began to be included in the major leagues  annual first-year player draft. in asia  baseball is among the most popular sports in japan and south korea.the major league game in the united states was originally targeted toward a middle-class  white-collar audience  relative to other spectator pastimes  the national league s set ticket price of 50 cents in 1876 was high  while the location of playing fields outside the inner city and the workweek daytime scheduling of games were also obstacles to a blue-collar audience. a century later  the situation was very different. with the rise in popularity of other team sports with much higher average ticket prices—football  basketball  and hockey—professional baseball had become among the most blue-collar-oriented of leading american spectator sports.overall  baseball has a large following in the united states  a 2006 poll found that nearly half of americans are fans. in the late 1900s and early 2000s  baseball s position compared to football in the united states moved in contradictory directions. in 2008  mlb set a revenue record of $6.5 billion  matching the nfl s revenue for the first time in decades. a new mlb revenue record of more than $10 billion was set in 2017. on the other hand  the percentage of american sports fans polled who named baseball as their favorite sport was 9%  compared to pro football at 37%. in 1985  the respective figures were pro football 24%  baseball 23%. because there are so many more major league games played  there is no comparison in overall attendance. in 2008  total attendance at major league games was the second-highest in history  78.6 million  0.7% off the record set the previous year. the following year  amid the u.s. recession  attendance fell by 6.6% to 73.4 million. eight years later  it dropped under 73 million. attendance at games held under the minor league baseball umbrella set a record in 2008  with 43.3 million.  in japan  where baseball is inarguably the leading spectator team sport  combined revenue for the twelve teams in nippon professional baseball (npb)  the body that oversees both the central
and pacific leagues  was estimated at $1 billion in 2007. total npb attendance for the year was approximately 20 million. while in the preceding two decades  mlb attendance grew by 50 percent and revenue nearly tripled  the comparable npb figures were stagnant. there are concerns that mlb s growing interest in acquiring star japanese players will hurt the game in their home country. in cuba  where baseball is by every reckoning the national sport  the national team overshadows the city and provincial teams that play in the top-level domestic leagues. revenue figures are not released for the country s amateur system. similarly  according to one official pronouncement  the sport s governing authority  has never taken into account attendance ... because its greatest interest has always been the development of athletes .as of 2018  little league baseball oversees leagues with close to 2.4 million participants in over 80 countries. the number of players has fallen since the 1990s  when 3 million children took part in little league baseball annually. babe ruth league teams have over 1 million participants. according to the president of the international baseball federation  between 300 000 and 500 000 women and girls play baseball around the world  including little league and the introductory game of tee ball.a varsity baseball team is an established part of physical education departments at most high schools and colleges in the united states. in 2015  nearly half a million high schoolers and over 34 000 collegians played on their schools  baseball teams. by early in the 20th century  intercollegiate baseball was japan s leading sport. today  high school baseball in particular is immensely popular there. the final rounds of the two annual tournaments—the national high school baseball invitational tournament in the spring  and the even more important national high school baseball championship in the summer—are broadcast around the country. the tournaments are known  respectively  as spring koshien and summer koshien after the 55 000-capacity stadium where they are played. in cuba  baseball is a mandatory part of the state system of physical education  which begins at age six. talented children as young as seven are sent to special district schools for more intensive training—the first step on a ladder whose acme is the national baseball team.   === in popular culture ===  baseball has had a broad impact on popular culture  both in the united states and elsewhere. dozens of english-language idioms have been derived from baseball  in particular  the game is the source of a number of widely used sexual euphemisms. the first networked radio broadcasts in north america were of the 1922 world series  famed sportswriter grantland rice announced play-by-play from new york city s polo grounds on wjz–newark  new jersey  which was connected by wire to wgy–schenectady  new york  and wbz–springfield  massachusetts. the baseball cap has become a ubiquitous fashion item not only in the united states and japan
 but also in countries where the sport itself is not particularly popular  such as the united kingdom.baseball has inspired many works of art and entertainment. one of the first major examples  ernest thayer s poem  casey at the bat  appeared in 1888. a wry description of the failure of a star player in what would now be called a  clutch situation  the poem became the source of vaudeville and other staged performances  audio recordings  film adaptations  and an opera  as well as a host of sequels and parodies in various media. there have been many baseball movies  including the academy award–winning the pride of the yankees (1942) and the oscar nominees the natural (1984) and field of dreams (1989). the american film institute s selection of the ten best sports movies includes the pride of the yankees at number 3 and bull durham (1988) at number 5. baseball has provided thematic material for hits on both stage—the adler–ross musical damn yankees—and record—george j. gaskin s  slide  kelly  slide  simon and garfunkel s  mrs. robinson  and john fogerty s  centerfield . the baseball-inspired comedic sketch  who s on first  popularized by abbott and costello in 1938  quickly became famous. six decades later  time named it the best comedy routine of the 20th century.literary works connected to the game include the short fiction of ring lardner and novels such as bernard malamud s the natural (the source for the movie)  robert coover s the universal baseball association  inc.  j. henry waugh  prop.  and w. p. kinsella s shoeless joe (the source for field of dreams). baseball s literary canon also includes the beat reportage of damon runyon  the columns of grantland rice  red smith  dick young  and peter gammons  and the essays of roger angell. among the celebrated nonfiction books in the field are lawrence s. ritter s the glory of their times  roger kahn s the boys of summer  and michael lewis s moneyball. the 1970 publication of major league pitcher jim bouton s tell-all chronicle ball four is considered a turning point in the reporting of professional sports.baseball has also inspired the creation of new cultural forms. baseball cards were introduced in the late 19th century as trade cards. a typical example featured an image of a baseball player on one side and advertising for a business on the other. in the early 1900s they were produced widely as promotional items by tobacco and confectionery companies. the 1930s saw the popularization of the modern style of baseball card  with a player photograph accompanied on the rear by statistics and biographical data. baseball cards—many of which are now prized collectibles—are the source of the much broader trading card industry  involving similar products for different sports and non-sports-related fields.modern fantasy sports began in 1980 with the invention of rotisserie league baseball by new york writer daniel okrent
and several friends. participants in a rotisserie league draft notional teams from the list of active mlb players and play out an entire imaginary season with game outcomes based on the players  latest real-world statistics. rotisserie-style play quickly became a phenomenon. now known more generically as fantasy baseball  it has inspired similar games based on an array of different sports. the field boomed with increasing internet access and new fantasy sports-related websites. by 2008  29.9 million people in the united states and canada were playing fantasy sports  spending $800 million on the hobby. the burgeoning popularity of fantasy baseball is also credited with the increasing attention paid to sabermetrics—first among fans  only later among baseball professionals.   == see also ==   == references ==   == sources ==   == further reading == dickson  paul. the dickson baseball dictionary  3d ed. (w. w. norton  2009). isbn 0-393-06681-9 fitts  robert k. remembering japanese baseball  an oral history of the game (southern illinois university press  2005). isbn 0-8093-2629-9 gillette  gary  and pete palmer (eds.). the espn baseball encyclopedia  5th ed. (sterling  2008). isbn 1-4027-6051-5 peterson  robert. only the ball was white  a history of legendary black players and all-black professional teams (oxford university press  1992 [1970]). isbn 0-19-507637-0 reaves  joseph a. taking in a game  a history of baseball in asia (bison  2004). isbn 0-8032-3943-2 ward  geoffrey c.  and ken burns. baseball  an illustrated history (alfred a. knopf  1996). isbn 0-679-40459-7   == external links ==  world baseball softball confederation  baseball . encyclopædia britannica online. baseball prospectus society for american baseball research mister baseball european baseball news baseball heritage museum at league park in cleveland  ohio
golf is a club-and-ball sport in which players use various clubs to hit balls into a series of holes on a course in as few strokes as possible. golf  unlike most ball games  cannot and does not utilize a standardized playing area  and coping with the varied terrains encountered on different courses is a key part of the game. the game at the usual level is played on a course with an arranged progression of 18 holes  though recreational courses can be smaller  often having nine holes. each hole on the course must contain a tee box to start from  and a putting green containing the actual hole or cup 4 1⁄4 inches (11 cm) in diameter. there are other standard forms of terrain in between  such as the fairway  rough (long grass)  bunkers (or  sand traps )  and various hazards (water  rocks) but each hole on a course is unique in its specific layout and arrangement. golf is played for the lowest number of strokes by an individual  known as stroke play  or the lowest score on the most individual holes in a complete round by an individual or team  known as match play. stroke play is the most commonly seen format at all levels  but most especially at the elite level. the modern game of golf originated in 15th century scotland. the 18-hole round was created at the old course at st andrews in 1764. golf s first major  and the world s oldest tournament in existence  is the open championship  also known as the british open  which was first played in 1860 in ayrshire  scotland. this is one of the four major championships in men s professional golf  the other three being played in the united states  the masters  the u.s. open  and the pga championship.   == origin and history ==  while the modern game of golf originated in 15th-century scotland  the game s ancient origins are unclear and much debated. some historians trace the sport back to the roman game of paganica  in which participants used a bent stick to hit a stuffed leather ball. one theory asserts that paganica spread throughout europe as the romans conquered most of the continent  during the first century bc  and eventually evolved into the modern game.others cite chuiwan (捶丸   chui  means striking and  wan  means small ball) as the progenitor  a chinese game played between the eighth and fourteenth centuries. a ming dynasty scroll by the artist youqiu dating back to 1368 entitled  the autumn banquet  shows a member of the chinese imperial court swinging what appears to be a golf club at a small ball with the aim of sinking it into a hole. the game is thought to have been introduced into europe during the middle ages.another early game that resembled modern golf was known as cambuca in england
and chambot in france. the persian game chaugán is another possible ancient origin. in addition  kolven (a game involving a ball and curved bats) was played annually in loenen  netherlands  beginning in 1297  to commemorate the capture of the assassin of floris v  a year earlier.  the modern game originated in scotland  where the first written record of golf is james ii s banning of the game in 1457  as an unwelcome distraction to learning archery. james iv lifted the ban in 1502 when he became a golfer himself  with golf clubs first recorded in 1503–1504   for golf clubbes and balles to the king that he playit with . to many golfers  the old course at st andrews  a links course dating to before 1574  is considered to be a site of pilgrimage. in 1764  the standard 18-hole golf course was created at st andrews when members modified the course from 22 to 18 holes. golf is documented as being played on musselburgh links  east lothian  scotland as early as 2 march 1672  which is certified as the oldest golf course in the world by guinness world records. the oldest surviving rules of golf were compiled in march 1744 for the company of gentlemen golfers  later renamed the honourable company of edinburgh golfers  which was played at leith  scotland. the world s oldest golf tournament in existence  and golf s first major  is the open championship  which was first played on 17 october 1860 at prestwick golf club  in ayrshire  scotland  with scottish golfers winning the earliest majors. two scotsmen from dunfermline  john reid and robert lockhart  first demonstrated golf in the u.s. by setting up a hole in an orchard in 1888  with reid setting up america s first golf club the same year  saint andrew s golf club in yonkers  new york.   == golf course ==  a golf course consists of either 9 or 18 holes  each with a teeing ground that is set off by two markers showing the bounds of the legal tee area  fairway  rough and other hazards  and the putting green surrounded by the fringe with the pin (normally a flagstick) and cup. the levels of grass are varied to increase difficulty  or to allow for putting in the case of the green. while many holes are designed with a direct line-of-sight from the teeing area to the green  some holes may bend either to the left or to the right. this is commonly called a  dogleg  in reference to a dog s knee. the hole is called a  dogleg left  if the hole angles leftwards and  dogleg right  if it bends right. sometimes  a hole s direction may bend twice  this is called a  double dogleg . a regular golf course consists of 18 holes
 but nine-hole courses are common and can be played twice through for a full round of 18 holes.early scottish golf courses were primarily laid out on links land  soil-covered sand dunes directly inland from beaches. this gave rise to the term  golf links  particularly applied to seaside courses and those built on naturally sandy soil inland. the first 18-hole golf course in the united states was on a sheep farm in downers grove  illinois  in 1892. the course is still there today.   == play of the game ==  every round of golf is based on playing a number of holes in a given order. a  round  typically consists of 18 holes that are played in the order determined by the course layout. each hole is played once in the round on a standard course of 18 holes. the game can be played by any number of people  although a typical group playing will have 1-4 people playing the round. the typical amount of time required for pace of play for a 9-hole round is two hours and four hours for an 18-hole round. playing a hole on a golf course is initiated by putting a ball into play by striking it with a club on the teeing ground (also called the tee box  or simply the tee). for this first shot on each hole  it is allowed but not required for the golfer to place the ball on a tee prior to striking it. a tee is a small peg that can be used to elevate the ball slightly above the ground up to a few centimetres high. tees are commonly made of wood but may be constructed of any material  including plastic. traditionally  golfers used mounds of sand to elevate the ball  and containers of sand were provided for the purpose. a few courses still require sand to be used instead of peg tees  to reduce litter and reduce damage to the teeing ground. tees help reduce the interference of the ground or grass on the movement of the club making the ball easier to hit  and also places the ball in the very centre of the striking face of the club (the  sweet spot ) for better distance. when the initial shot on a hole is intended to move the ball a long distance  typically more than 225 yards (210 m)  the shot is commonly called a  drive  and is generally made with a long-shafted  large-headed wood club called a  driver . shorter holes may be initiated with other clubs  such as higher-numbered woods or irons. once the ball comes to rest  the golfer strikes it again as many times as necessary using shots that are variously known as a  lay-up  an  approach  a  pitch  or a  chip  until the ball reaches the green  where he or she then  putts  the
ball into the hole (commonly called  sinking the putt  or  holing out ). the goal of getting the ball into the hole ( holing  the ball) in as few strokes as possible may be impeded by obstacles such as areas of longer grass called  rough  (usually found alongside fairways)  which both slows any ball that contacts it and makes it harder to advance a ball that has stopped on it   doglegs  which are changes in the direction of the fairway that often require shorter shots to play around them  bunkers (or sand traps)  and water hazards such as ponds or streams.in stroke play competitions played according to strict rules  each player plays his or her ball until it is holed no matter how many strokes that may take. in match play it is acceptable to simply pick up one s ball and  surrender the hole  after enough strokes have been made by a player that it is mathematically impossible for the player to win the hole. it is also acceptable in informal stroke play to surrender the hole after hitting three strokes more than the  par  rating of the hole (a  triple bogey  - see below)  while technically a violation of rule 3-2  this practice speeds play as a courtesy to others  and avoids  runaway scores  excessive frustration and injuries caused by overexertion. the total distance from the first tee box to the 18th green can be quite long  total yardages  through the green  can be in excess of 7 000 yards (6.4 km)  and when adding in the travel distance between the green of one hole and the tee of the next  even skilled players may easily travel five miles (8 km) or more during a round. at some courses  electric golf carts are used to travel between shots  which can speed-up play and allows participation by individuals unable to walk a whole round. on other courses players generally walk the course  either carrying their bag using a shoulder strap or using a  golf trolley  for their bag. these trolleys may or may not be battery assisted. at many amateur tournaments including u.s. high school and college play  players are required to walk and to carry their own bags  but at the professional and top amateur level  as well as at high-level private clubs  players may be accompanied by caddies  who carry and manage the players  equipment and who are allowed by the rules to give advice on the play of the course. a caddie s advice can only be given to the player or players for whom the caddie is working  and not to other competing players.   == rules and regulations ==  the rules of golf are internationally standardised and are jointly governed by the r&a  spun off in 2004 from the royal and ancient
golf club of st andrews (founded 1754)  and the united states golf association (usga).the underlying principle of the rules is fairness. as stated on the back cover of the official rule book   play the ball as it lies  play the course as you find it  and if you cannot do either  do what is fair.there are strict regulations regarding the amateur status of golfers. essentially  anybody who has ever received payment or compensation for giving instruction  or played golf for money  is not considered an amateur and may not participate in competitions limited solely to amateurs. however  amateur golfers may receive expenses that comply with strict guidelines and they may accept non-cash prizes within the limits established by the rules of amateur status. in addition to the officially printed rules  golfers also abide by a set of guidelines called golf etiquette. etiquette guidelines cover matters such as safety  fairness  pace of play  and a player s obligation to contribute to the care of the course. though there are no penalties for breach of etiquette rules  players generally follow the rules of golf etiquette in an effort to improve everyone s playing experience.   === penalties ===  penalties are incurred in certain situations. they are counted towards a player s score as if there were extra swing(s) at the ball. strokes are added for rule infractions or for hitting one s ball into an unplayable situation. a lost ball or a ball hit out of bounds result in a penalty of one stroke and distance (rule 27–1). a one-stroke penalty is assessed if a player s equipment causes the ball to move or the removal of a loose impediment causes the ball to move (rule 18–2). a one-stroke penalty is assessed if a player s ball results into a red or yellow staked hazard (rule 26). if a golfer makes a stroke at the wrong ball (rule 19–2) or hits a fellow golfer s ball with a putt (rule 19–5)  the player incurs a two-stroke penalty. most rule infractions lead to stroke penalties but also can lead to disqualification. disqualification could be from cheating  signing for a lower score  or from rule infractions that lead to improper play.   == equipment ==  golf clubs are used to hit the golf ball. each club is composed of a shaft with a lance (or  grip ) on the top end and a club head on the bottom. long clubs  which have a lower amount of degree loft  are those meant to propel the ball a comparatively longer distance  and short clubs a higher degree of loft and a comparatively shorter distance. the actual physical length of each club is longer or shorter  depending on the distance the club is intended to propel the ball. golf clubs have traditionally been arranged into three basic types. woods are large-headed  long-shafted clubs meant to propel the ball a long distance
from relatively  open  lies  such as the tee box and fairway. of particular importance is the driver or  1-wood  which is the lowest lofted wood club  and in modern times has become highly specialized for making extremely long-distance tee shots  up to 300 yards (270 m)  or more  in a professional golfer s hands. traditionally these clubs had heads made of a hardwood  hence the name  but virtually all modern woods are now made of metal such as titanium  or of composite materials. irons are shorter-shafted clubs with a metal head primarily consisting of a flat  angled striking face. traditionally the clubhead was forged from iron  modern iron clubheads are investment-cast from a steel alloy. irons of varying loft are used for a variety of shots from virtually anywhere on the course  but most often for shorter-distance shots approaching the green  or to get the ball out of tricky lies such as sand traps. the third class is the putter  which evolved from the irons to create a low-lofted  balanced club designed to roll the ball along the green and into the hole. putters are virtually always used on the green or in the surrounding rough/fringe. a fourth class  called hybrids  evolved as a cross between woods and irons  and are typically seen replacing the low-lofted irons with a club that provides similar distance  but a higher launch angle and a more forgiving nature. a maximum of 14 clubs is allowed in a player s bag at one time during a stipulated round. the choice of clubs is at the golfer s discretion  although every club must be constructed in accordance with parameters outlined in the rules. (clubs that meet these parameters are usually called  conforming .) violation of these rules can result in disqualification. the exact shot hit at any given time on a golf course  and which club is used to accomplish the shot  are always completely at the discretion of the golfer  in other words  there is no restriction whatsoever on which club a golfer may or may not use at any time for any shot. golf balls are spherical  usually white (although other colours are allowed)  and minutely pock-marked by dimples that decrease aerodynamic drag by increasing air turbulence around the ball in motion  which delays  boundary layer  separation and reduces the drag-inducing  wake  behind the ball  thereby allowing the ball to fly farther. the combination of a soft  boundary layer  and a hard  core  enables both distance and spin. a tee is allowed only for the first stroke on each hole  unless the player must hit a provisional tee shot or replay his or her first shot from the tee. many golfers wear golf shoes with metal or plastic spikes designed to increase traction  thus allowing for longer and more accurate shots. a golf bag
is used to transport golf clubs and the player s other or personal equipment. golf bags have several pockets designed for carrying equipment and supplies such as tees  balls  and gloves. golf bags can be carried  pulled on a trolley or harnessed to a motorized golf cart during play. golf bags usually have both a hand strap and shoulder strap for carrying  others may be carried over both shoulders like a backpack  and often bags have retractable legs that allow the bag to stand upright when at rest.   == stroke mechanics ==  the golf swing is outwardly similar to many other motions involving swinging a tool or playing implement  such as an axe or a baseball bat. however  unlike many of these motions  the result of the swing is highly dependent on several sub-motions being properly aligned and timed. these ensure that the club travels up to the ball in line with the desired path  that the clubface is in line with the swing path  and that the ball hits the centre or  sweet spot  of the clubface. the ability to do this consistently  across a complete set of clubs with a wide range of shaft lengths and clubface areas  is a key skill for any golfer  and takes a significant effort to achieve.   === stance === stance refers to how the golfer positions themselves in order to play a stroke  it is fundamentally important in being able to play a stroke effectively. the stance adopted is determined by what stroke is being played. all stances involve a slight crouch. this allows for a more efficient striking posture whilst also isometrically preloading the muscles of the legs and core  this allows the stroke to be played more dynamically and with a greater level of overall control. when adopting their stance golfers start with the non-dominant side of the body facing the target (for a right-hander  the target is to their left). setting the stance in regard to the position of the ball  and placing the clubhead behind the ball  is known as being at address  when in this position the player s body and the centerline of the club face are positioned parallel to the desired line of travel  with the feet either perpendicular to that line or slightly splayed outward. the feet are commonly shoulder-width apart for middle irons and putters  narrower for short irons and wider for long irons and woods. the ball is typically positioned more to the  front  of the player s stance (closer to the leading foot) for lower-lofted clubs  with the usual ball position for a drive being just behind the arch of the leading foot. the ball is placed further  back  in the player s stance (toward the trailing foot) as the loft of the club to be used increases. most iron shots and putts are made with the ball roughly centered
in the stance  while a few mid- and short-iron shots are made with the ball slightly behind the centre of the stance to ensure consistent contact between the ball and clubface  so the ball is on its way before the club continues down into the turf.   === strokes === the golfer chooses a golf club  grip  and stroke appropriate to the distance   the  drive  or  full swing  is used on the teeing ground and fairway  typically with a wood or long iron  to produce the maximum distance capable with the club. in the extreme  the windup can end with the shaft of the club parallel to the ground above the player s shoulders. the  approach  or  3/4 swing  is used in medium- and long-distance situations where an exact distance and good accuracy is preferable to maximum possible distance  such as to place the ball on the green or  lay up  in front of a hazard. the windup or  backswing  of such a shot typically ends up with the shaft of the club pointing straight upwards or slightly towards the player. the  chip  or  half-swing  is used for relatively short-distance shots near the green  with high-lofted irons and wedges. the goal of the chip is to land the ball safely on the green  allowing it to roll out towards the hole. it can also be used from other places to accurately position the ball into a more advantageous lie. the backswing typically ends with the head of the club between hip and head height. the  putt  is used in short-distance shots on or near the green  typically made with the eponymous  putter  although similar strokes can be made with medium to high-numbered irons to carry a short distance in the air and then roll (a  bump and run ). the backswing and follow-through of the putt are both abbreviated compared to other strokes  with the head of the club rarely rising above the knee. the goal of the putt is usually to put the ball in the hole  although a long-distance putt may be called a  lag  and is made with the primary intention of simply closing distance to the hole or otherwise placing the ball advantageously.having chosen a club and stroke to produce the desired distance  the player addresses the ball by taking their stance to the side of it and (except when the ball lies in a hazard) grounding the club behind the ball. the golfer then takes their backswing  rotating the club  their arms and their upper body away from the ball  and then begins their swing  bringing the clubhead back down and around to hit the ball. a proper golf swing is a complex combination of motions  and slight variations in posture or positioning can make a great deal of difference in how
well the ball is hit and how straight it travels. the general goal of a player making a full swing is to propel the clubhead as fast as possible while maintaining a single  plane  of motion of the club and clubhead  to send the clubhead into the ball along the desired path of travel and with the clubhead also pointing that direction. accuracy and consistency are typically stressed over pure distance. a player with a straight drive that travels only 220 yards (200 m) will nevertheless be able to accurately place the ball into a favourable lie on the fairway  and can make up for the lesser distance of any given club by simply using  more club  (a lower loft) on their tee shot or on subsequent fairway and approach shots. however  a golfer with a drive that may go 280 yards (260 m) but often doesn t fly straight will be less able to position their ball advantageously  the ball may  hook   pull   draw   fade   push  or  slice  off the intended line and land out of bounds or in the rough or hazards  and thus the player will require many more strokes to hole out.   === musculature === a golf stroke uses the muscles of the core (especially erector spinae muscles and latissimus dorsi muscle when turning)  hamstring  shoulder  and wrist. stronger muscles in the wrist can prevent them from being twisted during swings  whilst stronger shoulders increase the turning force. weak wrists can also transmit the force to elbows and even neck and lead to injury. (when a muscle contracts  it pulls equally from both ends and  to have movement at only one end of the muscle  other muscles must come into play to stabilize the bone to which the other end of the muscle is attached.) golf is a unilateral exercise that can break body balances  requiring exercises to keep the balance in muscles.   === types of putting === putting is considered to be the most important component of the game of golf. as the game of golf has evolved  there have been many different putting techniques and grips that have been devised to give golfers the best chance to make putts. when the game originated  golfers would putt with their dominate hand on the bottom of the grip and their weak hand on top of the grip. this grip and putting style is known as  conventional . there are many variations of conventional including overlap  where the golfer overlaps the off hand index finger onto off the dominant pinky  interlock  where the offhand index finger interlocks with the dominant pinky and ring finger  double or triple overlap and so on. recently   cross handed  putting has become a popular trend amongst professional golfers and amateurs. cross handed putting is the idea that the dominant hand is
on top of the grip where the weak hand is on the bottom. this grip restricts the motion in your dominant hand and eliminates the possibility of wrist breakdowns through the putting stroke.other notable putting styles include  the claw  a style that has the grip directly in between the thumb and index finger of the dominant hand while the palm faces the target. the weak hand placed normally on the putter. anchored putting  a style that requires a longer putter shaft that can be anchored into the players stomach or below the chin  the idea is to stabilize one end of the putter thus creating a more consistent pendulum stroke. this style will be banned in 2016 on the professional circuits.   == scoring and handicapping ==   === par ===  a hole is classified by its par  meaning the number of strokes a skilled golfer should require to complete play of the hole. the minimum par of any hole is 3 because par always includes a stroke for the tee shot and two putts.  pars of 4 and 5 strokes are ubiquitous on golf courses  more rarely  a few courses feature par-6 and even par-7 holes. strokes other than the tee shot and putts are expected to be made from the fairway  for example  a skilled golfer expects to reach the green on a par-4 hole in two strokes—one from the tee (the  drive ) and another  second  stroke to the green (the  approach )—and then roll the ball into the hole in two putts for par. putting the ball on the green with two strokes remaining for putts is called making  green in regulation  or gir. missing a gir does not necessarily mean a golfer will not make par  but it does make doing so more difficult as it reduces the number of putts available  conversely  making a gir does not guarantee a par  as the player might require three or more putts to  hole out . professional golfers typically make between 60% and 70% of greens in regulation.the primary factor for classifying the par of a relatively straight  hazard-free hole is the distance from the tee to the green  and they can vary between tournament play and casual play. a typical casual play par-3 hole is less than 250 yards (230 m) in length  with a par-4 hole ranging between 251–450 yards (230–411 m)  and a par-5 hole being longer than 450 yards (410 m). the rare par-6s can stretch well over 650 yards (590 m). these distances are based on the typical scratch golfer s drive distance of between 240 and 280 yards (220 and 260 m)  a green further than the average player s drive will require additional shots from the fairway. however  other considerations must be taken into account  the key question is  how many strokes would a scratch golfer take to make the
green by playing along the fairway . the grade of the land from the tee to the hole might increase or decrease the carry and rolling distance of shots as measured linearly along the ground. sharp turns or hazards may require golfers to  lay up  on the fairway in order to change direction or hit over the hazard with their next shot. these design considerations will affect how even a scratch golfer would play the hole  irrespective of total distance from tee to green  and must be included in a determination of par. however  a par score never includes  expected  penalty strokes  as a scratch player is never  expected  to hit a ball into a water hazard or other unplayable situation. so the placement of hazards only affect par when considering how a scratch golfer would avoid them. eighteen-hole courses typically total to an overall par score of 72 for a complete round  this is based on an average par of 4 for every hole  and so is often arrived at by designing a course with an equal number of par-5 and par-3 holes  the rest being par-4. many combinations exist that total to par-72  and other course pars exist from 68 up to 76  and are not less worthy than courses of par-72. additionally  in some countries including the united states  courses are classified according to their play difficulty  which may be used to calculate a golfer s playing handicap for a given course.the two primary difficulty ratings in the u.s. are the course rating  which is effectively the expected score for a zero-handicap  scratch golfer  playing the course (and may differ from the course par)  and the slope rating  which is a measure of how much worse a  bogey golfer  (with an 18 handicap) would be expected to play than a  scratch golfer . these two numbers are available for any usga-sanctioned course  and are used in a weighted system to calculate handicaps (see below). the overall par score in a tournament is the summation of all the par scores in each round. a typical four-round professional tournament played on a par-72 course has a tournament par of 288.   ==== scoring ==== the goal is to play as few strokes per round as possible. a golfer s number of strokes in a hole  course  or tournament is compared to its respective par score  and is then reported either as the number that the golfer was  under-  or  over-par  or if it was  equal to par . a hole in one (or an  ace ) occurs when a golfer sinks their ball into the cup with their first stroke from the tee. common scores for a hole also have specific terms. in a typical professional tournament or among  scratch  amateur players   birdie-bogey  play is common  a player
will  lose  a stroke by bogeying a hole  then  gain  one by scoring a birdie. eagles are uncommon but not rare  however  only 18 players have scored an albatross in a men s major championship.   === basic forms of golf === there are two basic forms of golf play  match play and stroke play. stroke play is more popular.   ==== match play ==== two players (or two teams) play each hole as a separate contest against each other in what is called match play. the party with the lower score wins that hole  or if the scores of both players or teams are equal the hole is  halved  (or tied). the game is won by the party that wins more holes than the other. in the case that one team or player has taken a lead that cannot be overcome in the number of holes remaining to be played  the match is deemed to be won by the party in the lead  and the remainder of the holes are not played. for example  if one party already has a lead of six holes  and only five holes remain to be played on the course  the match is over and the winning party is deemed to have won  6 & 5 . at any given point  if the lead is equal to the number of holes remaining  the party leading the match is said to be  dormie  and the match is continued until the party increases the lead by one hole or ties any of the remaining holes  thereby winning the match  or until the match ends in a tie with the lead player s opponent winning all remaining holes. when the game is tied after the predetermined number of holes have been played  it may be continued until one side takes a one-hole lead.   ==== stroke play ==== the score achieved for each and every hole of the round or tournament is added to produce the total score  and the player with the lowest score wins in stroke play. stroke play is the game most commonly played by professional golfers. if there is a tie after the regulation number of holes in a professional tournament  a playoff takes place between all tied players. playoffs either are sudden death or employ a pre-determined number of holes  anywhere from three to a full 18. in sudden death  a player who scores lower on a hole than all of his opponents wins the match. if at least two players remain tied after such a playoff using a pre-determined number of holes  then play continues in sudden death format  where the first player to win a hole wins the tournament.   === other forms of play === the other forms of play in the game of golf are bogey competition  skins  9-points  stableford  team play
 and unofficial team variations.   ==== bogey competition ==== a bogey competition is a scoring format sometimes seen in informal tournaments. its scoring is similar to match play  except each player compares their hole score to the hole s par rating instead of the score of another player. the player  wins  the hole if they score a birdie or better  they  lose  the hole if they score a bogey or worse  and they  halve  the hole by scoring par. by recording only this simple win-loss-halve score on the sheet  a player can shrug off a very poorly-played hole with a simple  -  mark and move on. as used in competitions  the player or pair with the best win-loss  differential  wins the competition.   ==== skins ==== the skins game is a variation on the match play where each hole has an amount of money (called  skin ) attached to it. the lump sum may be prize money at the professional level (the most famous event to use these rules was the  lg skins game  played at indian wells golf resort in california until 2008)  or an amount wagered for each hole among amateur players. the player with the lowest score on the hole wins the skin for that hole  if two or more players tie for the lowest score  the skin carries over to the next hole. the game continues until a player wins a hole outright  which may (and evidently often does) result in a player receiving money for a previous hole that they had not tied for. if players tie the 18th hole  either all players or only the tying players repeat the 18th hole until an outright winner is decided for that hole—and all undecided skins.   ==== 9-points ==== a nine-point game is another variant of match play typically played among threesomes  where each hole is worth a total of nine points. the player with the lowest score on a hole receives five points  the next-lowest score 3 and the next-lowest score 1. ties are generally resolved by summing the points contested and dividing them among the tying players  a two-way tie for first is worth four points to both players  a two-way tie for second is worth two points to both players  and a three-way tie is worth three points to each player. the player with the highest score after 18 holes (in which there are 162 points to be awarded) wins the game. this format can be used to wager on the game systematically  players each contribute the same amount of money to the pot  and a dollar value is assigned to each point scored (or each point after 18) based on the amount of money in the pot  with any overage going to the overall winner.   ==== stableford ==== the stableford system is a simplification of stroke play
that awards players points based on their score relative to the hole s par  the score for a hole is calculated by taking the par score  adding 2  then subtracting the player s hole score  making the result zero if negative. alternately stated  a double bogey or worse is zero points  a bogey is worth one point  par is two  a birdie three  an eagle four  and so on. the advantages of this system over stroke play are a more natural  higher is better  scoring  the ability to compare stableford scores between plays on courses with different total par scores (scoring an  even  in stroke play will always give a stableford score of 36)  discouraging the tendency to abandon the entire game after playing a particularly bad hole (a novice playing by strict rules may score as high as an 8 or 10 on a single difficult hole  their stableford score for the hole would be zero  which puts them only two points behind par no matter how badly they played)  and the ability to simply pick up one s ball once it is impossible to score any points for the hole  which speeds play. the usga and r&a sanction a  modified stableford  system for scratch players  which makes par worth zero  a birdie worth 2  eagle 5 and double-eagle 8  while a bogey is a penalty of −1 and a double-bogey or worse −3. as with the original system  the highest score wins the game  and terrible scores on one or two holes won t wreck an entire game  but this system rewards  bogey-birdie  play more than the original  encouraging golfers to try to make the riskier birdie putt or eagle chipshot instead of simply parring each hole.   ==== team play ====  foursome  defined in rule 29  this is played between two teams of two players each  in which each team has only one ball and players alternate playing it. for example  if players  a  and  b  form a team   a  tees off on the first hole   b  will play the second shot   a  the third  and so on until the hole is finished. on the second hole   b  will tee off (regardless who played the last putt on the first hole)  then  a  plays the second shot  and so on. foursomes can be played as match play or stroke play. fourball  defined in rules 30 and 31  this is also played between two teams of two players each  but every player plays their own ball and for each team  the lower score on each hole counts. fourballs can be played as match play or stroke play.   ===== unofficial team variations ===== scramble  also
known as ambrose or best-shot  each player in a team tees off on each hole  and the players decide which shot was best. every player then plays their second shot from within a clublength of where the best shot has come to rest (and no closer to the hole)  and the procedure is repeated until the hole is finished. this system is very common at informal tournaments such as for charity  as it speeds play (due to the reduced number of shots taken from bad lies)  allows teams of varying sizes  and allows players of widely varying skill levels to participate without profoundly affecting team score. champagne scramble  a combination of a scramble and best-ball  only the first shot of each hole is a scramble  all players tee off  decide on the best tee shot  then each player plays their own ball starting at that point until they hole out  without deciding any further  best shots . the best score amongst the team s players is counted. better ball or best-ball  like fourball  each player plays the hole as normal  but the lowest score of all the players on the team counts as the team s score for the hole. greensome (also known as scotch foursomes)  also called modified alternate shot  this is played in pairs  both players tee off  and then pick the best shot as in a scramble. the player who did not shoot the best first shot plays the second shot. the play then alternates as in a foursome. a variant of greensome is sometimes played where the opposing team chooses which of their opponent s tee shots the opponents should use. the player who did not shoot the chosen first shot plays the second shot. play then continues as a greensome. wolf (also known as ship  captain & crew  captain  pig)  a version of match play  with a foursome an order of play for each player is established for the duration of the round.  the first player hits a ball from the tee  then waits for each successive player to hit (2nd  3rd and 4th).  after each player hits the 1st player has the option of choosing a partner for the hole (the 1st player is the wolf for that hole) usually by calling wolf before the next player hits.  once a partner is picked  each two-some (the wolf and his or her partner vs the remaining two players) scores their total strokes and the winning two-some is awarded 1-point each for winning a hole and zero points for tying.  the next hole  the rotation moves forward (e.g. the 2nd player is now hitting 1st and the wolf and the previous wolf hits last). a wolf can decide to go alone to win extra points  but they must beat all other players in stroke play on that hole.  if alone  the wolf
is awarded 2-points for going alone after everyone has hit or 4 points for declaring lone wolf before anyone else hits.  if the lone wolf loses  to even one player  the 3 other players get 1-point each. the winner is the player with the most points at the end of the round.  strategically  care must be taken not to let a low-handicap player run away with all the points by being constantly paired with the wolf. shotgun starts are mainly used for amateur tournament play. in this variant  each of the groups playing starts their game on a different hole  allowing for all players to start and end their round at roughly the same time. all 18 holes are still played  but a player or foursome may  for instance  start on hole 5  play through to the 18th hole  then continue with hole 1 and end on hole 4. this speeds the completion of the entire event as players are not kept waiting for progressive tee times at the first hole. this form of play  as a minor variation to stroke or match play  is neither defined nor disallowed by strict rules and so is used according to local rules for an event.   === handicap systems ===  a handicap is a numerical measure of an amateur golfer s ability to play golf over the course of 18 holes. a player s handicap generally represents the number of strokes above par that the player will make over the course of an above-average round of golf. the better the player the lower their handicap is. someone with a handicap of 0 or less is often called a scratch golfer  and would typically score or beat the course par on a round of play (depending on course difficulty). calculating a handicap is often complicated  the general reason being that golf courses are not uniformly challenging from course to course or between skill levels. a player scoring even par on course a might average four over par on course b  while a player averaging 20 over par on course a might average only 16 over on course b. so  to the  scratch golfer  course b is more difficult  but to the  bogey golfer  course a is more difficult. the reasons for this are inherent in the types of challenges presented by the same course to both golfers. distance is often a problem for amateur  bogey  golfers with slower swing speeds  who get less distance with each club  and so typically require more shots to get to the green  raising their score compared to a scratch golfer with a stronger swing. however  courses are often designed with hazard placement to mitigate this advantage  forcing the scratch player to  lay up  to avoid bunkers or water  while the bogey golfer is more or less unaffected as the hazard lies out of their
range. finally  terrain features and fairway maintenance can affect golfers of all skill levels  narrowing the fairway by adding obstacles or widening the rough on each side will typically increase the percentage of shots made from disadvantageous lies  increasing the challenge for all players. by usga rules  handicap calculation first requires calculating a  handicap differential  for each round of play the player has completed by strict rules. that in itself is a function of the player s  gross adjusted score  (adjustments can be made to mitigate various deviations either from strict rules or from a player s normal capabilities  for handicap purposes only) and two course-specific difficulty ratings  the course rating  a calculated expected score for a hypothetical  scratch golfer  and the slope rating  a number based on how much worse a hypothetical 20-handicap  bogey golfer  would score compared to the  scratch golfer . the average slope rating of all usga-rated courses as of 2012 is 113  which also factors into the differential computation. the most recent differentials are logged  up to 20 of them  and then the best of these (the number used depends on the number available) are selected  averaged  multiplied by .96 (an  excellence factor  that reduces the handicap of higher-scoring players  encouraging them to play better and thus lower their handicap)  and truncated to the tenths place to produce the  handicap index . additional calculations can be used to place higher significance on a player s recent tournament scores. a player s handicap index is then multiplied by the slope rating of the course to be played  divided by the average slope rating of 113  then rounded to the nearest integer to produce the player s course handicap. once calculated  the course handicap is applied in stroke play by simply reducing the player s gross score by the handicap  to produce a net score. so  a gross score of 96 with a handicap of 22 would produce a net score of 74. in match play  the lower handicap is subtracted from the higher handicap  and the resulting handicap strokes are awarded to the higher handicapper by distributing them among the holes according to each hole s difficulty  holes are ranked on the scorecard from 1 to 18 (or however many holes are available)  and one stroke is applied to each hole from the most difficult to the least difficult. so  if one player has a 9 handicap and another has a 25 handicap  the 25-handicap player receives one handicap stroke on each of the most difficult 16 holes (25-9). if the 25-handicapper were playing against a  scratch golfer  (zero handicap)  all 25 strokes would be distributed  first by applying one stroke to each hole  then applying the remaining strokes  one each  to the most difficult 7 holes  so  the handicap player
would subtract 2 strokes from each of the most difficult 7 holes  and 1 each from the remaining 11. handicap systems have potential for abuse by players who may intentionally play badly to increase their handicap ( throwing their  cap ) before playing to their potential at an important event with a valuable prize. for this reason  professional golf associations do not use them  but they can be calculated and used along with other criteria to determine the relative strengths of various professional players. touring professionals  being the best of the best  often have negative handicaps  they can be expected  on average  to score lower than the course rating on any course.   == popularity ==  in 2005 golf digest calculated that the countries with most golf courses per capita  in order  were  scotland  new zealand  australia  ireland  canada  wales  united states  sweden  and england (countries with fewer than 500 000 people were excluded). the number of courses in other territories has increased  an example of this being the expansion of golf in china. the first golf course in china opened in 1984  but by the end of 2009 there were roughly 600 in the country. for much of the 21st century  development of new golf courses in china has been officially banned (with the exception of the island province of hainan)  but the number of courses had nonetheless tripled from 2004 to 2009  the  ban  has been evaded with the government s tacit approval simply by not mentioning golf in any development plans.in the united states  the number of people who play golf twenty-five times or more per year decreased from 6.9 million in 2000 to 4.6 million in 2005  according to the national golf foundation. the ngf reported that the number who played golf at all decreased from 30 to 26 million over the same period.in february 1971  astronaut alan shepard became the first person to golf anywhere other than earth. he smuggled a golf club and two golf balls on board apollo 14 with the intent to golf on the moon. he attempted two drives. he shanked the first attempt  but it is estimated his second went more than 200 yards (180 m).   === golf courses worldwide === number of golf courses by country in 2015. below are the top 18 countries that have the most golf courses.   == professional golf ==  the majority of professional golfers work as club or teaching professionals ( pros )  and only compete in local competitions. a small elite of professional golfers are  tournament pros  who compete full-time on international  tours . many club and teaching professionals working in the golf industry start as caddies or with a general interest in the game  finding employment at golf courses and eventually moving on to certifications in their chosen profession. these programs
include independent institutions and universities  and those that eventually lead to a class a golf professional certification. touring professionals typically start as amateur players  who attain their  pro  status after success in major tournaments that win them either prize money and/or notice from corporate sponsors. jack nicklaus  for example  gained widespread notice by finishing second in the 1960 u.s. open to champion arnold palmer  with a 72-hole score of 282 (the best score to date in that tournament by an amateur). he played one more amateur year in 1961  winning that year s u.s. amateur championship  before turning pro in 1962.   === instruction ===  golf instruction involves the teaching and learning of the game of golf. proficiency in teaching golf instruction requires not only technical and physical ability but also knowledge of the rules and etiquette of the game. in some countries  golf instruction is best performed by teachers certified by the professional golfers association. some top instructors who work with professional golfers have become quite well known in their own right. professional golf instructors can use physical conditioning  mental visualization  classroom sessions  club fitting  driving range instruction  on-course play under real conditions  and review of videotaped swings in slow motion to teach golf to prepare the golfer for the course.   === golf tours ===  there are at least twenty professional golf tours  each run by a pga or an independent tour organization  which is responsible for arranging events  finding sponsors  and regulating the tour. typically a tour has  members  who are entitled to compete in most of its events  and also invites non-members to compete in some of them. gaining membership of an elite tour is highly competitive  and most professional golfers never achieve it.  perhaps the most widely known tour is the pga tour  which tends to attract the strongest fields  outside the four majors and the four world golf championships events. this is due mostly to the fact that most pga tour events have a first prize of at least 800 000 usd. the european tour  which attracts a substantial number of top golfers from outside north america  ranks second to the pga tour in worldwide prestige. some top professionals from outside north america play enough tournaments to maintain membership on both the pga tour and european tour. since 2010  both tours  money titles have been claimed by the same individual three times  with luke donald doing so in 2011 and rory mcilroy in 2012 and 2014. in 2013  henrik stenson won the fedex cup points race on the pga tour and the european tour money title  but did not top the pga tour money list (that honour going to tiger woods). the other leading men s tours include the japan golf tour  the asian tour (asia outside japan)  the pga tour of australasia  and the
sunshine tour (for southern africa  primarily south africa). the japan  australasian  sunshine  pga  and european tours are the charter members of the trade body of the world s main tours  the international federation of pga tours  founded in 1996. the asian tour became a full member in 1999. the canadian tour became an associate member of the federation in 2000  and the tour de las américas (latin america) became an associate member of the federation in 2007. the federation underwent a major expansion in 2009 that saw eleven new tours become full members – the canadian tour  tour de las américas  china golf association  the korea professional golfers  association  professional golf tour of india  and the operators of all six major women s tours worldwide. the oneasia tour  founded in 2009  is not a member of the federation  but was founded as a joint venture of the australasia  china  japan  and korean tours. in 2011  the tour de las américas was effectively taken over by the pga tour  and in 2012 was folded into the new pga tour latinoamérica. also in 2012  the canadian tour was renamed pga tour canada after it agreed to be taken over by the pga tour. all men s tours that are federation members  except the india tour  offer points in the official world golf ranking (owgr) to players who place sufficiently high in their events. the oneasia tour also offers ranking points. golf is unique in having lucrative competition for older players. there are several senior tours for men aged fifty and over  arguably the best known of which is the u.s.-based pga tour champions. there are six principal tours for women  each based in a different country or continent. the most prestigious of these is the united states-based lpga tour. all of the principal tours offer points in the women s world golf rankings for high finishers in their events. all of the leading professional tours for under-50 players have an official developmental tour  in which the leading players at the end of the season will earn a tour card on the main tour for the following season. examples include the web.com tour  which feeds to the pga tour  and the challenge tour  which is the developmental tour of the european tour. the web.com and challenge tours also offer owgr points.   === men s major championships ===  the major championships are the four most prestigious men s tournaments of the year. in chronological order they are  the masters  the u.s. open  the open championship (referred to in north america as the british open) and the pga championship.the fields for these events include the top several dozen golfers from all over the world. the masters has been played at augusta national golf club in augusta  georgia  since its inception in 1934. it is the only major championship
that is played at the same course each year. the u.s. open and pga championship are played at courses around the united states  while the open championship is played at courses around the united kingdom.prior to the advent of the pga championship and the masters  the four majors were the u.s. open  the u.s. amateur  the open championship  and the british amateur.   === women s major championships ===  women s golf does not have a globally agreed set of majors. the list of majors recognised by the dominant women s tour  the lpga tour in the u.s.  has changed several times over the years  with the most recent changes occurring in 2001 and 2013. like the pga tour  the (u.s.) lpga tour long had four majors  but now has five  the ana inspiration (previously known by several other names  most recently the kraft nabisco championship)  the women s pga championship (previously known as the lpga championship)  the u.s. women s open  the women s british open (which replaced the du maurier classic as a major in 2001) and the evian championship (added as the fifth major in 2013). only the last two are also recognised as majors by the ladies european tour. however  the significance of this is limited  as the lpga is far more dominant in women s golf than the pga tour is in mainstream men s golf. for example  the bbc has been known to use the u.s. definition of  women s majors  without qualifying it. also  the ladies  golf union  the governing body for women s golf in great britain and ireland  stated on its official website that the women s british open was  the only women s major to be played outside the u.s.  (this was before the elevation of the evian championship to major status). for many years  the ladies european tour tacitly acknowledged the dominance of the lpga tour by not scheduling any of its own events to conflict with the three lpga majors played in the u.s.  but that changed beginning in 2008  when the let scheduled an event opposite the lpga championship. the second-richest women s tour  the lpga of japan tour  does not recognise any of the u.s. lpga or european majors as it has its own set of majors (historically three  since 2008 four). however  these events attract little notice outside japan.   === senior major championships ===  senior (aged fifty and over) men s golf does not have a globally agreed set of majors. the list of senior majors on the u.s.-based pga tour champions has changed over the years  but always by expansion. pga tour champions now recognises five majors  the senior pga championship  the tradition  the senior players championship  the united states senior open  and the senior (british) open championship. of the five events
 the senior pga is by far the oldest  having been founded in 1937. the other events all date from the 1980s  when senior golf became a commercial success as the first golf stars of the television era  such as arnold palmer and gary player  reached the relevant age. the senior open championship was not recognised as a major by pga tour champions until 2003. the european senior tour recognises only the senior pga and the two senior opens as majors. however  pga tour champions is arguably more dominant in global senior golf than the u.s. lpga is in global women s golf.   === olympic games ===  after a 112-year absence from the olympic games  golf returned for the 2016 rio games.  41 different countries were represented by 120 athletes.   == controversy ==   === women === it wasn t until 1552 that the first woman golfer played the game. mary queen of scots commissioned st. andrew s links. however  it wasn t until the 20th century that women were taken seriously and eventually broke the  gentlemen only  ladies forbidden  rule. many men saw women as unfit to play the sport due to their lack of strength and ability. in the united states  1891 was a pivotal year for ladies golf because the shinnecock hills nine-hole course was built in southampton  new york  for women and was the first club to offer membership to women golfers. four years later  in 1895  the u.s. golf association held the first women s amateur championship tournament.just like professional golfer bobby jones  joyce wethered was considered to be a star in the 1920s. jones praised wethered in 1930 after they had played an exhibition against each other. he doubted that there had ever been a better golfer  man or woman. however  bobby jones  comment wasn t enough for others to change their views on women golfers. the royal liverpool s club refused entry of sir henry cotton s wife into the clubhouse in the late 1940s. the secretary of the club released a statement saying   no woman ever has entered the clubhouse and  praise god  no woman ever will.  however  american golfer and all-around athlete  babe zaharias didn t have to enter the clubhouse. she was able to prove herself on the course  going on to become the first american to win the british women s amateur title in 1947. the following year she became the first woman to attempt to qualify for the u.s. open  but her application was rejected by the usga. they stated that the event was intended to be open to men only.the ladies professional golf association was formed in 1950 as a way to popularize the sport and provide competitive opportunities for golfers. the competitions were not the same for the men and women. it wasn t until 1972 that u.s. congress passed the title ix
of the education amendments.  no person in the united states shall  on the basis of sex  be excluded from participation in  be denied the benefits of  or be subject to discrimination under any education program or activities receiving federal financial assistance.  american renee powell moved to the uk in the 1970s to further her career  and became the first woman to play in a british men s tournament in 1977.today  women golfers are still fighting and working hard to have the same opportunities as men golfers. there is still a big pay gap in the usga. the usga has a long history of writing bigger checks to winners of the men s u.s. open than the u.s. women s open.   == international events ==   == see also == glossary of golf outline of golf lists of golfers list of golf courses in the united kingdom professional golfers  association of america variations of golf   == references ==   == external links ==  the r&a  st andrews usga  united states golf association golf australia  national governing body of australia international golf federation (igf)
a lawyer or attorney is a person who practices law  as an advocate  attorney  attorney at law  barrister  barrister-at-law  bar-at-law  canonist  canon lawyer  civil law notary  counsel  counselor  counsellor  solicitor  legal executive  or public servant preparing  interpreting and applying law  but not as a paralegal or charter executive secretary. working as a lawyer involves the practical application of abstract legal theories and knowledge to solve specific individualized problems  or to advance the interests of those who hire lawyers to perform legal services. the role of the lawyer varies greatly across different legal jurisdictions.   == terminology == in practice  legal jurisdictions exercise their right to determine who is recognized as being a lawyer. as a result  the meaning of the term  lawyer  may vary from place to place. some jurisdictions have two types of lawyers  barrister and solicitors  whilst others fuse the two. a barrister is a lawyer who specializes in higher court appearances. a solicitor is a lawyer who is trained to prepare cases and give advice on legal subjects and can represent people in lower courts. both barristers and solicitors have gone through law school  completed the requisite practical training. however  in jurisdictions where there is a split-profession  only barristers are admitted as members of their respective bar association.  in australia  the word  lawyer  can be used to refer to both barristers and solicitors (whether in private practice or practicing as corporate in-house counsel)  and whoever is admitted as a lawyer of the supreme court of a state or territory. in canada  the word  lawyer  only refers to individuals who have been called to the bar or  in quebec  have qualified as civil law notaries. common law lawyers in canada are formally and properly called  barristers and solicitors  but should not be referred to as  attorneys  since that term has a different meaning in canadian usage  being a person appointed under a power of attorney. however  in quebec  civil law advocates (or avocats in french) often call themselves  attorney  and sometimes  barrister and solicitor  in english  and all lawyers in quebec  or lawyers in the rest of canada when practicing in french  are addressed with the honorific title   me.  or  maître . in england and wales   lawyer  is used to refer to persons who provide reserved  and unreserved legal activities and includes practitioners such as barristers  attorneys  solicitors  registered foreign lawyers  patent attorneys  trade mark attorneys  licensed conveyancers  public notaries  commissioners for oaths  immigration advisers and claims management services. the  legal services act 2007 defines the  legal activities  that may only be performed by a person who is entitled to do so pursuant to the act.  lawyer
 is not a protected title. in pakistan  the term  advocate  is used instead of lawyer in the legal practitioners and bar councils act  1973. in india  the term  lawyer  is often commonly used  but the official term is  advocate  as prescribed under the advocates act  1961. in scotland  the word  lawyer  refers to a more specific group of legally trained people. it specifically includes advocates and solicitors. in a generic sense  it may also include judges and law-trained support staff. in the united states  the term generally refers to attorneys who may practice law. it is never used to refer to patent agents or paralegals. in fact  there are statutory and regulatory restrictions on non-lawyers like paralegals practicing law. other nations tend to have comparable terms for the analogous concept.   == responsibilities == in most countries  particularly civil law countries  there has been a tradition of giving many legal tasks to a variety of civil law notaries  clerks  and scrivener. these countries do not have  lawyers  in the american sense  insofar as that term refers to a single type of general-purpose legal services provider  rather  their legal professions consist of a large number of different kinds of law-trained persons  known as jurists  some of whom are advocates who are licensed to practice in the courts. it is difficult to formulate accurate generalizations that cover all the countries with multiple legal professions  because each country has traditionally had its own peculiar method of dividing up legal work among all its different types of legal professionals.notably  england  the mother of the common law jurisdictions  emerged from the middle ages with similar complexity in its legal professions  but then evolved by the 19th century to a single division between barristers and solicitors. an equivalent division developed between advocates and procurators in some civil law countries  these two types did not always monopolize the practice of law  in that they coexisted with civil law notaries.several countries that originally had two or more legal professions have since fused or united their professions into a single type of lawyer. most countries in this category are common law countries  though france  a civil law country  merged its jurists in 1990 and 1991 in response to anglo-american competition. in countries with fused professions  a lawyer is usually permitted to carry out all or nearly all the responsibilities listed below.   === oral argument in the courts ===  arguing a client s case before a judge or jury in a court of law is the traditional province of the barrister in england  and of advocates in some civil law jurisdictions. however  the boundary between barristers and solicitors has evolved. in england today  the  barrister  monopoly covers only appellate courts  and barristers must compete directly with solicitors in many trial courts. in
countries like the united states  that have fused legal professions  there are trial lawyers who specialize in trying cases in court  but trial lawyers do not have a legal monopoly like barristers. in some countries  litigants have the option of arguing pro se  or on their own behalf. it is common for litigants to appear unrepresented before certain courts like small claims courts  indeed  many such courts do not allow lawyers to speak for their clients  in an effort to save money for all participants in a small case. in other countries  like venezuela  no one may appear before a judge unless represented by a lawyer. the advantage of the latter regime is that lawyers are familiar with the court s customs and procedures  and make the legal system more efficient for all involved. unrepresented parties often damage their own credibility or slow the court down as a result of their inexperience.   === research and drafting of court papers === often  lawyers brief a court in writing on the issues in a case before the issues can be orally argued. they may have to perform extensive research into relevant facts. also  they are drafting legal papers and preparing for an oral argument. in england  the usual division of labor is that a solicitor will obtain the facts of the case from the client and then brief a barrister (usually in writing). the barrister then researches and drafts the necessary court pleadings (which will be filed and served by the solicitor) and orally argues the case.in spain  the procurator merely signs and presents the papers to the court  but it is the advocate who drafts the papers and argues the case.in some countries  like japan  a scrivener or clerk may fill out court forms and draft simple papers for lay persons who cannot afford or do not need attorneys  and advise them on how to manage and argue their own cases.   === advocacy (written and oral) in administrative hearings === in most developed countries  the legislature has granted original jurisdiction over highly technical matters to executive branch administrative agencies which oversee such things. as a result  some lawyers have become specialists in administrative law. in a few countries  there is a special category of jurists with a monopoly over this form of advocacy  for example  france formerly had conseils juridiques (who were merged into the main legal profession in 1991). in other countries  like the united states  lawyers have been effectively barred by statute from certain types of administrative hearings in order to preserve their informality.   === client intake and counseling (with regard to pending litigation) === an important aspect of a lawyer s job is developing and managing relationships with clients (or the client s employees  if the lawyer works in-house for a government or corporation). the client-lawyer relationship is explained in six steps. first  the relationship begins
with an intake interview where the lawyer gets to know the client personally. second step is discovering the facts of the client s case. thirdly is clarifying what the client wants to accomplish.  the fourth step is where the lawyer shapes the client s expectations as to what actually can be accomplished. the second to last step  begins to develop various claims or defenses for the client. lastly  the lawyer explains her or his fees to the client.in england  only solicitors were traditionally in direct contact with the client. the solicitor retained a barrister if one was necessary and acted as an intermediary between the barrister and the client. in most cases barristers were obliged  under what is known as the  cab rank rule  to accept instructions for a case in an area in which they held themselves out as practicing  at a court at which they normally appeared and at their usual rates.   === legal advice ===  legal advice is the application of abstract principles of law to the concrete facts of the client s case in order to advise the client about what they should do next. in many countries  only a properly licensed lawyer may provide legal advice to clients for good consideration  even if no lawsuit is contemplated or is in progress. therefore  even conveyancer and corporate in-house counsel must first get a license to practice  though they may actually spend very little of their careers in court. failure to obey such a rule is the crime of unauthorized practice of law.in other countries  jurists who hold law degrees are allowed to provide legal advice to individuals or to corporations  and it is irrelevant if they lack a license and cannot appear in court. some countries go further  in england and wales  there is no general prohibition on the giving of legal advice.  singapore does not have any admission requirements for in-house counsel.  sometimes civil law notaries are allowed to give legal advice  as in belgium.in many countries  non-jurist accountants may provide what is technically legal advice in tax and accounting matters.   === protecting intellectual property === in virtually all countries  patents  trademarks  industrial designs and other forms of intellectual property must be formally registered with a government agency in order to receive maximum protection under the law. the division of such work among lawyers  licensed non-lawyer jurists/agents  and ordinary clerks or scriveners varies greatly from one country to the next.   === negotiating and drafting contracts === in some countries  the negotiating and drafting of contracts is considered to be similar to the provision of legal advice  so that it is subject to the licensing requirement explained above. in others  jurists or notaries may negotiate or draft contracts.lawyers in some civil law countries traditionally deprecated  transactional law  or  business law  as beneath them. french law firms developed transactional departments
only in the 1990s when they started to lose business to international firms based in the united states and the united kingdom (where solicitors have always done transactional work).   === conveyancing === conveyancing is the drafting of the documents necessary for the transfer of real property  such as deeds and mortgages. in some jurisdictions  all real estate transactions must be carried out by a lawyer (or a solicitor where that distinction still exists). such a monopoly is quite valuable from the lawyer s point of view  historically  conveyancing accounted for about half of english solicitors  income (though this has since changed)  and a 1978 study showed that conveyancing  accounts for as much as 80 percent of solicitor-client contact in new south wales.  in most common law jurisdictions outside of the united states  this monopoly arose from an 1804 law that was introduced by william pitt the younger as a quid pro quo for the raising of fees on the certification of legal professionals such as barristers  solicitors  attorneys and notaries.in others  the use of a lawyer is optional and banks  title companies  or realtors may be used instead. in some civil law jurisdictions  real estate transactions are handled by civil law notaries. in england and wales a special class of legal professional–the licensed conveyancer–is also allowed to carry out conveyancing services for reward.   === carrying out the intent of the deceased === in many countries  only lawyers have the legal authority to draft wills  trusts  and any other documents that ensure the efficient disposition of a person s property after death. in some civil law countries this responsibility is handled by civil law notaries.in the united states  the estates of the deceased must generally be administered by a court through probate. american lawyers have a profitable monopoly on dispensing advice about probate law (which has been heavily criticized).   === prosecution and defense of criminal suspects === in many civil law countries  prosecutors are trained and employed as part of the judiciary  they are law-trained jurists  but may not necessarily be lawyers in the sense that the word is used in the common law world. in common law countries  prosecutors are usually lawyers holding regular licenses who simply happen to work for the government office that files criminal charges against suspects. criminal defense lawyers specialize in the defense of those charged with any crimes.   == education ==  the educational prerequisites for becoming a lawyer vary greatly from country to country. in some countries  law is taught by a faculty of law  which is a department of a university s general undergraduate college. law students in those countries pursue a master or bachelor of laws degree. in some countries it is common or even required for students to earn another bachelor s degree at the same time. it is often followed by a series of advanced examinations  apprenticeships 
and additional coursework at special government institutes.in other countries  particularly the uk and u.s.a.  law is primarily taught at law schools.  in america  the american bar association decides which law schools to approve and thereby which ones are deemed  most respectable. in england and wales  the bar professional training course (bptc) must be taken to have the right to work and be named as a barrister. students who decide to pursue a non-law subject at degree level can instead study the graduate diploma in law (gdl) after their degrees  before beginning the legal practice course (lpc) or bptc. in the united states and countries following the american model  (such as canada with the exception of the province of quebec) law schools are graduate/professional schools where a bachelor s degree is a prerequisite for admission. most law schools are part of universities but a few are independent institutions. law schools in the united states and canada (with the exception of mcgill university) award graduating students a j.d. (juris doctor/doctor of jurisprudence) (as opposed to the bachelor of laws) as the practitioner s law degree. many schools also offer post-doctoral law degrees such as the ll.m (legum magister/master of laws)  or the s.j.d. (scientiae juridicae doctor/doctor of juridical science) for students interested in advancing their research knowledge and credentials in a specific area of law.the methods and quality of legal education vary widely. some countries require extensive clinical training in the form of apprenticeships or special clinical courses. others  like venezuela  do not. a few countries prefer to teach through assigned readings of judicial opinions (the casebook method) followed by intense in-class cross-examination by the professor (the socratic method). many others have only lectures on highly abstract legal doctrines  which forces young lawyers to figure out how to actually think and write like a lawyer at their first apprenticeship (or job). depending upon the country  a typical class size could range from five students in a seminar to five hundred in a giant lecture room. in the united states  law schools maintain small class sizes  and as such  grant admissions on a more limited and competitive basis.some countries  particularly industrialized ones  have a traditional preference for full-time law programs  while in developing countries  students often work full- or part-time to pay the tuition and fees of their part-time law programs.law schools in developing countries share several common problems  such as an over reliance on practicing judges and lawyers who treat teaching as a part-time hobby (and a concomitant scarcity of full-time law professors)  incompetent faculty with questionable credentials  and textbooks that lag behind the current state of the law by two or three decades.   === earning the right to practice law ===  some jurisdictions grant a  diploma privilege  to certain institutions  so that merely earning a degree or credential from those institutions is the primary qualification for practicing law. mexico allows anyone with a law
degree to practice law. however  in a large number of countries  a law student must pass a bar examination (or a series of such examinations) before receiving a license to practice. in a handful of u.s. states  one may become an attorney (a so-called country lawyer) by simply  reading law  and passing the bar examination  without having to attend law school first (although very few people actually become lawyers that way).some countries require a formal apprenticeship with an experienced practitioner  while others do not. for example  a few jurisdictions still allow an apprenticeship in place of any kind of formal legal education (though the number of persons who actually become lawyers that way is increasingly rare).some countries  such as singapore  do not have any admission requirements for in-house counsel.   == career structure ==  the career structure of lawyers varies widely from one country to the next.   === common law/civil law === in most common law countries  especially those with fused professions  lawyers have many options over the course of their careers. besides private practice  they can become a prosecutor  government counsel  corporate in-house counsel  administrative law judge  judge  arbitrator  or law professor. there are also many non-legal jobs for which legal training is good preparation  such as politician  corporate executive  government administrator  investment banker  entrepreneur  or journalist. in developing countries like india  a large majority of law students never actually practice  but simply use their law degree as a foundation for careers in other fields.in most civil law countries  lawyers generally structure their legal education around their chosen specialty  the boundaries between different types of lawyers are carefully defined and hard to cross. after one earns a law degree  career mobility may be severely constrained. for example  unlike their american counterparts  it is difficult for german judges to leave the bench and become advocates in private practice. another interesting example is france  where for much of the 20th century  all judiciary officials were graduates of an elite professional school for judges. although the french judiciary has begun experimenting with the anglo-american model of appointing judges from accomplished advocates  the few advocates who have actually joined the bench this way are looked down upon by their colleagues who have taken the traditional route to judicial office.in a few civil law countries  such as sweden  the legal profession is not rigorously bifurcated and everyone within it can easily change roles and arenas.   === specialization === in many countries  lawyers are general practitioners who represent clients in a broad field of legal matters. in others  there has been a tendency since the start of the 20th century for lawyers to specialize early in their careers.in countries where specialization is prevalent  many lawyers specialize in representing one side in one particular area of the law  thus  it
is common in the united states to hear of plaintiffs  personal injury attorneys. texas offers attorneys the opportunity to receive a board certification through the state s texas board of legal specialization. to be board certified  attorney applicants undergo a rigorous examination in one of 24 areas of practice offered by the texas board of legal specialization. only those attorneys who are  board certified  are permitted to use the word  specialize  in any publicly accessible materials such as a website or television commercial. see texas rule 7.02(a)(6).   === organization ===  lawyers in private practice generally work in specialized businesses known as law firms  with the exception of english barristers. the vast majority of law firms worldwide are small businesses that range in size from 1 to 10 lawyers. the united states  with its large number of firms with more than 50 lawyers  is an exception. the united kingdom and australia are also exceptions  as the uk  australia and the u.s. are now home to several firms with more than 1 000 lawyers after a wave of mergers in the late 1990s. notably  barristers in england  wales  northern ireland and some states in australia do not work in  law firms . those who offer their services to members of the general public—as opposed to those working  in-house  — are required to be self-employed. most work in groupings known as  sets  or  chambers  where some administrative and marketing costs are shared. an important effect of this different organizational structure is that there is no conflict of interest where barristers in the same chambers work for opposing sides in a case  and in some specialized chambers this is commonplace.   == professional associations and regulation ==   === mandatory licensing and membership in professional organizations === in some jurisdictions  either the judiciary or the ministry of justice directly supervises the admission  licensing  and regulation of lawyers. other jurisdictions  by statute  tradition  or court order  have granted such powers to a professional association which all lawyers must belong to. in the u.s.  such associations are known as mandatory  integrated  or unified bar associations. in the commonwealth of nations  similar organizations are known as inns of court  bar councils or law societies. in civil law countries  comparable organizations are known as orders of advocates  chambers of advocates  colleges of advocates  faculties of advocates  or similar names. generally  a nonmember caught practicing law may be liable for the crime of unauthorized practice of law.in common law countries with divided legal professions  barristers traditionally belong to the bar council (or an inn of court) and solicitors belong to the law society. in the english-speaking world  the largest mandatory professional association of lawyers is the state bar of california  with 230 000 members. some countries admit and regulate lawyers at the national
level  so that a lawyer  once licensed  can argue cases in any court in the land. this is common in small countries like new zealand  japan  and belgium. others  especially those with federal governments  tend to regulate lawyers at the state or provincial level  this is the case in the united states  canada  australia  and switzerland  to name a few. brazil is the most well-known federal government that regulates lawyers at the national level.some countries  like italy  regulate lawyers at the regional level  and a few  like belgium  even regulate them at the local level (that is  they are licensed and regulated by the local equivalent of bar associations but can advocate in courts nationwide). in germany  lawyers are admitted to regional bars and may appear for clients before all courts nationwide with the exception of the federal court of justice of germany (bundesgerichtshof or bgh)  oddly  securing admission to the bgh s bar limits a lawyer s practice solely to the supreme federal courts and the federal constitutional court of germany.generally  geographic limitations can be troublesome for a lawyer who discovers that his client s cause requires him to litigate in a court beyond the normal geographic scope of his license. although most courts have special pro hac vice rules for such occasions  the lawyer will still have to deal with a different set of professional responsibility rules  as well as the possibility of other differences in substantive and procedural law. some countries grant licenses to non-resident lawyers  who may then appear regularly on behalf of foreign clients. others require all lawyers to live in the jurisdiction or to even hold national citizenship as a prerequisite for receiving a license to practice. but the trend in industrialized countries since the 1970s has been to abolish citizenship and residency restrictions. for example  the supreme court of canada struck down a citizenship requirement on equality rights grounds in 1989  and similarly  american citizenship and residency requirements were struck down as unconstitutional by the u.s. supreme court in 1973 and 1985  respectively. the european court of justice made similar decisions in 1974 and 1977 striking down citizenship restrictions in belgium and france.   === who regulates lawyers === a key difference among countries is whether lawyers should be regulated solely by an independent judiciary and its subordinate institutions (a self-regulating legal profession)  or whether lawyers should be subject to supervision by the ministry of justice in the executive branch. in most civil law countries  the government has traditionally exercised tight control over the legal profession in order to ensure a steady supply of loyal judges and bureaucrats. that is  lawyers were expected first and foremost to serve the state  and the availability of counsel for private litigants was an afterthought. even in civil law countries like norway which have partially self-regulating professions  the ministry of justice is the sole
issuer of licenses  and makes its own independent re-evaluation of a lawyer s fitness to practice after a lawyer has been expelled from the advocates  association. brazil is an unusual exception in that its national order of advocates has become a fully self-regulating institution (with direct control over licensing) and has successfully resisted government attempts to place it under the control of the ministry of labor.of all the civil law countries  communist countries historically went the farthest towards total state control  with all communist lawyers forced to practice in collectives by the mid-1950s. china is a prime example  technically  the people s republic of china did not have lawyers  and instead had only poorly trained  state-employed  legal workers  prior to the enactment of a comprehensive reform package in 1996 by the standing committee of the national people s congress.in contrast  common law lawyers have traditionally regulated themselves through institutions where the influence of non-lawyers  if any  was weak and indirect (despite nominal state control). such institutions have been traditionally dominated by private practitioners who opposed strong state control of the profession on the grounds that it would endanger the ability of lawyers to zealously and competently advocate their clients  causes in the adversarial system of justice.however  the concept of the self-regulating profession has been criticized as a sham which serves to legitimize the professional monopoly while protecting the profession from public scrutiny. disciplinary mechanisms have been astonishingly ineffective  and penalties have been light or nonexistent.   === voluntary associations === lawyers are always free to form voluntary associations of their own  apart from any licensing or mandatory membership that may be required by the laws of their jurisdiction. like their mandatory counterparts  such organizations may exist at all geographic levels. in american english  such associations are known as voluntary bar associations. the largest voluntary professional association of lawyers in the english-speaking world is the american bar association. in some countries  like france and italy  lawyers have also formed trade unions.   == cultural perception ==  hostility towards the legal profession is a widespread phenomenon. the legal profession was abolished in prussia in 1780 and in france in 1789  though both countries eventually realized that their judicial systems could not function efficiently without lawyers. complaints about too many lawyers were common in both england and the united states in the 1840s  germany in the 1910s  and in australia  canada  the united states  and scotland in the 1980s. public distrust of lawyers reached record heights in the united states after the watergate scandal. in the aftermath of watergate  legal self-help books became popular among those who wished to solve their legal problems without having to deal with lawyers. lawyer jokes (already a perennial favorite) also soared in popularity in english-speaking north america as a result of watergate. in 1989  american legal self-help publisher nolo press published a 171-page compilation of negative anecdotes
about lawyers from throughout human history.in adventures in law and justice (2003)  legal researcher bryan horrigan dedicated a chapter to  myths  fictions  and realities  about law and illustrated the perennial criticism of lawyers as  amoral [...] guns for hire  with a quote from ambrose bierce s satirical the devil s dictionary (1911) that summarized the noun as   lawyer  n. one skilled in circumvention of the law. more generally  in legal ethics  a comparative study (2004)  law professor geoffrey c. hazard  jr. with angelo dondi briefly examined the  regulations attempting to suppress lawyer misconduct  and noted that their similarity around the world was paralleled by a  remarkable consistency  in certain  persistent grievances  about lawyers that transcends both time and locale  from the bible to medieval england to dynastic china. the authors then generalized these common complaints about lawyers as being classified into five  general categories  as follows   abuse of litigation in various ways  including using dilatory tactics and false evidence and making frivolous arguments to the courts preparation of false documentation  such as false deeds  contracts  or wills deceiving clients and other persons and misappropriating property procrastination in dealings with clients charging excessive feessome studies have shown that suicide rates among lawyers may be as much as six times higher than the average population  and commentators suggest that the low opinion the public has of lawyers  combined with their own high ideals of justice  which in practice they may see denied  increase the depression rates of those in this profession. additionally  lawyers are twice as likely to suffer from addiction to alcohol and other drugs.   == compensation ==  in the united states  lawyers typically earn between $45 000 and $160 000 per year  although earnings vary by age and experience  practice setting  sex  and race. solo practitioners typically earn less than lawyers in corporate law firms but more than those working for state or local government. lawyers are paid for their work in a variety of ways. in private practice  they may work for an hourly fee according to a billable hour structure  a contingency fee (usually in cases involving personal injury)  or a lump sum payment if the matter is straightforward. normally  most lawyers negotiate a written fee agreement up front and may require a non-refundable retainer in advance. recent studies suggest that when lawyers charge a fixed-fee rather than billing by the hour  they work less hard on behalf of clients and client get worse outcomes.  in many countries there are fee-shifting arrangements by which the loser must pay the winner s fees and costs  the united states is the major exception  although in turn  its legislators have carved out many exceptions to the so-called  american rule  of no fee shifting. lawyers working directly on the payroll of
governments  nonprofits  and corporations usually earn a regular annual salary. in many countries  with the notable exception of germany  lawyers can also volunteer their labor in the service of worthy causes through an arrangement called pro bono (short for pro bono publico   for the common good ). traditionally such work was performed on behalf of the poor  but in some countries it has now expanded to many other causes such as the environment. in some countries  there are legal aid lawyers who specialize in providing legal services to the indigent. france and spain even have formal fee structures by which lawyers are compensated by the government for legal aid cases on a per-case basis. a similar system  though not as extensive or generous  operates in australia  canada  and south africa.in other countries  legal aid specialists are practically nonexistent. this may be because non-lawyers are allowed to provide such services  in both italy and belgium  trade unions and political parties provide what can be characterized as legal aid services. some legal aid in belgium is also provided by young lawyer apprentices subsidized by local bar associations (known as the pro deo system)  as well as consumer protection nonprofit organizations and public assistance agencies subsidized by local governments. in germany  mandatory fee structures have enabled widespread implementation of affordable legal expense insurance.   == history ==   === ancient greece === the earliest people who could be described as  lawyers  were probably the orators of ancient athens (see history of athens). however  athenian orators faced serious structural obstacles. first  there was a rule that individuals were supposed to plead their own cases  which was soon bypassed by the increasing tendency of individuals to ask a  friend  for assistance. however  around the middle of the fourth century  the athenians disposed of the perfunctory request for a friend. second  a more serious obstacle  which the athenian orators never completely overcame  was the rule that no one could take a fee to plead the cause of another. this law was widely disregarded in practice  but was never abolished  which meant that orators could never present themselves as legal professionals or experts. they had to uphold the legal fiction that they were merely an ordinary citizen generously helping out a friend for free  and thus they could never organize into a real profession—with professional associations and titles and all the other pomp and circumstance—like their modern counterparts. therefore  if one narrows the definition to those men who could practice the legal profession openly and legally  then the first lawyers would have to be the orators of ancient rome.   === ancient rome === a law enacted in 204 bc barred roman advocates from taking fees  but the law was widely ignored. the ban on fees was abolished by emperor claudius  who legalized advocacy as a profession and allowed the
roman advocates to become the first lawyers who could practice openly—but he also imposed a fee ceiling of 10 000 sesterces. this was apparently not much money  the satires of juvenal complained that there was no money in working as an advocate.like their greek contemporaries  early roman advocates were trained in rhetoric  not law  and the judges before whom they argued were also not law-trained. but very early on  unlike athens  rome developed a class of specialists who were learned in the law  known as jurisconsults (iuris consulti). jurisconsults were wealthy amateurs who dabbled in law as an intellectual hobby  they did not make their primary living from it. they gave legal opinions (responsa) on legal issues to all comers (a practice known as publice respondere). roman judges and governors would routinely consult with an advisory panel of jurisconsults before rendering a decision  and advocates and ordinary people also went to jurisconsults for legal opinions. thus  the romans were the first to have a class of people who spent their days thinking about legal problems  and this is why their law became so  precise  detailed  and technical.   during the roman republic and the early roman empire  jurisconsults and advocates were unregulated  since the former were amateurs and the latter were technically illegal. any citizen could call himself an advocate or a legal expert  though whether people believed him would depend upon his personal reputation. this changed once claudius legalized the legal profession. by the start of the byzantine empire  the legal profession had become well-established  heavily regulated  and highly stratified. the centralization and bureaucratization of the profession was apparently gradual at first  but accelerated during the reign of emperor hadrian. at the same time  the jurisconsults went into decline during the imperial period.in the words of fritz schulz   by the fourth century things had changed in the eastern empire  advocates now were really lawyers.  for example  by the fourth century  advocates had to be enrolled on the bar of a court to argue before it  they could only be attached to one court at a time  and there were restrictions (which came and went depending upon who was emperor) on how many advocates could be enrolled at a particular court. by the 380s  advocates were studying law in addition to rhetoric (thus reducing the need for a separate class of jurisconsults)  in 460  emperor leo imposed a requirement that new advocates seeking admission had to produce testimonials from their teachers  and by the sixth century  a regular course of legal study lasting about four years was required for admission. claudius s fee ceiling lasted all the way into the byzantine period  though by then it was measured at 100 solidi. it was widely evaded  either through demands for maintenance and expenses or a sub rosa barter transaction. the latter was cause for disbarment.the
notaries (tabelliones) appeared in the late roman empire. like their modern-day descendants  the civil law notaries  they were responsible for drafting wills  conveyances  and contracts. they were ubiquitous and most villages had one. in roman times  notaries were widely considered to be inferior to advocates and jury consults.   === middle ages ===  after the fall of the western roman empire and the onset of the early middle ages  the legal profession of western europe collapsed. as james brundage has explained   [by 1140]  no one in western europe could properly be described as a professional lawyer or a professional canonist in anything like the modern sense of the term  professional.    however  from 1150 onward  a small but increasing number of men became experts in canon law but only in furtherance of other occupational goals  such as serving the catholic church as priests. from 1190 to 1230  however  there was a crucial shift in which some men began to practice canon law as a lifelong profession in itself.the legal profession s return was marked by the renewed efforts of church and state to regulate it. in 1231  two french councils mandated that lawyers had to swear an oath of admission before practicing before the bishop s courts in their regions  and a similar oath was promulgated by the papal legate in london in 1237. during the same decade  the emperor of the holy roman empire frederick ii  the king of the kingdom of sicily  imposed a similar oath in his civil courts. by 1250  the nucleus of a new legal profession had clearly formed. the new trend towards professionalization culminated in a controversial proposal at the second council of lyon in 1275 that all ecclesiastical courts should require an oath of admission. although not adopted by the council  it was highly influential in many such courts throughout europe. the civil courts in england also joined the trend towards professionalization  in 1275 a statute was enacted that prescribed punishment for professional lawyers guilty of deceit  and in 1280 the mayor s court of the city of london promulgated regulations concerning admission procedures  including the administering of an oath.  and in 1345  the french crown promulgated a royal ordinance which set forth 24 rules governing advocates  of which 12 were integrated into the oath to be taken by them.the french medieval oaths were widely influential and of enduring importance  for example  they directly influenced the structure of the advocates  oath adopted by the canton of geneva in 1816.  in turn  the 1816 geneva oath served as the inspiration for the attorney s oath drafted by david dudley field as section 511 of the proposed new york code of civil procedure of 1848  which was the first attempt in the united states at a comprehensive statement of a lawyer s professional duties.   == titles ==
 generally speaking  the modern practice is for lawyers to avoid use of any title  although formal practice varies across the world. historically lawyers in most european countries were addressed with the title of doctor  and countries outside of europe have generally followed the practice of the european country which had policy influence through colonization. the first university degrees  starting with the law school of the university of bologna (or glossators) in the 11th century  were all law degrees and doctorates. degrees in other fields did not start until the 13th century  but the doctor continued to be the only degree offered at many of the old universities until the 20th century. therefore  in many of the southern european countries  including portugal and italy  lawyers have traditionally been addressed as “doctor ” a practice  which was transferred to many countries in south america and macau. the term  doctor  has since fallen into disuse  although it is still a legal title in italy and in use in many countries outside of europe.in french- (france  quebec  belgium  luxembourg  french-speaking area of switzerland) and dutch-speaking countries (netherlands  belgium)  legal professionals are addressed as maître ...  abbreviated to me ... (in french) or meester ...  abbreviated to mr. ... (in dutch). the title of doctor has never been used to address lawyers in england or other common law countries (with the exception of the united states). this is because until 1846 lawyers in england were not required to have a university degree and were trained by other attorneys by apprenticeship or in the inns of court. since law degrees started to become a requirement for lawyers in england  the degree awarded has been the undergraduate ll.b. in south africa holders of a law degree who have completed a year of pupillage and have been admitted to the bar may use the title  advocate  abbreviated to  adv  in written correspondence. likewise  italian law graduates who have qualified for the bar use the title  avvocato  abbreviated in  avv.  even though most lawyers in the united states do not use any titles  the law degree in that country is the juris doctor  a professional doctorate degree  and some j.d. holders in the united states use the title of  doctor  in professional and academic situations. in countries where holders of the first law degree traditionally use the title of doctor (e.g. peru  brazil  macau  portugal  argentina)  j.d. holders who are attorneys will often use the title of doctor as well. it is common for english-language male lawyers to use the honorific suffix  esq.  (for  esquire ). in the united states the style is also used by female lawyers. in many asian countries  holders of the juris doctor degree are also called  博士  (doctor).in the philippines and filipino communities overseas  lawyers who are
either filipino or naturalized-citizen expatriates at work there  especially those who also profess other jobs at the same time  are addressed and introduced as either attorney or counselor (especially in courts)  rather than sir/madam in speech or mr./mrs./ms. (g./gng./bb. in filipino) before surnames. that word is used either in itself or before the given name or surname.   == see also ==   == notes ==
a jurist (from medieval latin) is an expert of law or someone who researches jurisprudence. such a person can work as an academic (legal scholar)  legal writer  law lecturer and practice law (lawyer)  depending on legislation in the respective jurisdiction.  professionally  in the united kingdom  australia  new zealand  south africa  and in many other commonwealth countries  the word jurist sometimes refers to a barrister and solicitor  whereas in the united states of america and canada it often refers to a judge.thus a jurist  someone who studies  analyses and comments on law  stands in contrast with a lawyer  someone who applies law on behalf of clients and thinks about it in practical terms.there is a fundamental difference between the work of a lawyer and that of a jurist. many legal scholars and authors have explained that a person may be both a lawyer and a jurist  but a jurist is not necessarily a lawyer  nor a lawyer necessarily a jurist. both must possess an acquaintance with the term  law . the work of the jurist is the study  analysis and arrangement of the law—work which can be done wholly in the seclusion of the library. the work of the lawyer is the satisfaction of the wishes of particular human beings for legal assistance—work which requires dealing to some extent therefore with people in the office  in the court room  or in the market-place. the term jurist has another sense  which is wider  synonymous with legal professional  i.e. anyone professionally involved with law and justice. in some other european languages  a word resembling jurist (such as italian giurista  german jurist  norwegian/danish/swedish/dutch jurist  french juriste   spanish and portuguese jurista  russian юрист etc.) is used in this major sense.   == notable jurists == this is a sequential classification of some notable jurists.                                                                                           == see also == history of the legal profession history of the american legal profession law professor legal profession list of jurists paralegal   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to jurists at wikimedia commons
attorney at law or attorney-at-law  usually abbreviated in everyday speech to attorney  is the preferred term for a practising lawyer in certain jurisdictions  including south africa (for certain lawyers)  sri lanka  and the united states. in canada  it is used only in quebec. the term has its roots in the verb to attorn  meaning to transfer one s rights and obligations to another.   == previous usage in ireland and britain == the term was previously used in england and wales and ireland for lawyers who practised in the common law courts. they were officers of the courts and were under judicial supervision. attorneys did not generally actually appear as advocates in the higher courts  a role reserved (as it still usually is) for barristers. solicitors  those lawyers who practised in the courts of equity  were considered to be more respectable than attorneys and by the mid-19th century many attorneys were calling themselves solicitors.the supreme court of judicature act 1873 in england and wales and the supreme court of judicature act (ireland) 1877 in ireland redesignated all attorneys as solicitors.in the now three separate jurisdictions of england and wales  ireland  and northern ireland  references in any enactment to attorneys must be construed as references to solicitors.   == see also == attorneys in japan attorneys in sri lanka attorneys in the united states attorneys in south africa   == references ==
a barrister is a type of lawyer in common law jurisdictions. barristers mostly specialise in courtroom advocacy and litigation. their tasks include taking cases in superior courts and tribunals  drafting legal pleadings  researching the philosophy  hypothesis and history of law  and giving expert legal opinions. barristers are distinguished from solicitors  who have more direct access to clients  and may do transactional-type legal work. it is mainly barristers who are appointed as judges  and they are rarely hired by clients directly. in some legal systems  including those of scotland  south africa  scandinavia  pakistan  india  bangladesh  and the british crown dependencies of jersey  guernsey and the isle of man  the word barrister is also regarded as an honorific title. in a few jurisdictions  barristers are usually forbidden from  conducting  litigation  and can only act on the instructions of a solicitor  who performs tasks such as corresponding with parties and the court  and drafting court documents. in england and wales  barristers may seek authorisation from the bar standards board to conduct litigation. this allows a barrister to practise in a  dual capacity  fulfilling the role of both barrister and solicitor.in some countries with common law legal systems  such as new zealand and some regions of australia  lawyers are entitled to practise both as barristers and solicitors  but it remains a separate system of qualification to practise exclusively as a barrister.   == differences between barristers and other lawyers ==   === differences ===  a barrister  who can be considered a jurist  is a lawyer who represents a litigant as advocate before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. a barrister speaks in court and presents the case before a judge or jury. in some jurisdictions  a barrister receives additional training in evidence law  ethics  and court practice and procedure. in contrast  a solicitor generally meets with clients  does preparatory and administrative work and provides legal advice. in this role  he or she may draft and review legal documents  interact with the client as necessary  prepare evidence  and generally manage the day-to-day administration of a lawsuit. a solicitor can provide a crucial support role to a barrister when in court  such as managing large volumes of documents in the case or even negotiating a settlement outside the courtroom while the trial continues inside. there are other essential differences. a barrister will usually have rights of audience in the higher courts  whereas other legal professionals will often have more limited access  or will need to acquire additional qualifications to have such access. as in common law countries in which there is a split between the roles of barrister and solicitor  the barrister in civil law jurisdictions is responsible for appearing in trials or pleading cases before the courts. barristers usually have particular knowledge of case law  precedent  and the skills to
 build  a case. when a solicitor in general practice is confronted with an unusual point of law  they may seek the  opinion of counsel  on the issue.in most countries  barristers operate as sole practitioners and are prohibited from forming partnerships or from working as a barrister as part of a corporation. (in 2009  the clementi report recommended the abolition of this restriction in england and wales.) however  barristers normally band together into  chambers  to share clerks (administrators) and operating expenses. some chambers grow to be large and sophisticated and have a distinctly corporate feel. in some jurisdictions  they may be employed by firms of solicitors  banks  or corporations as in-house legal advisers. in contrast  solicitors and attorneys work directly with the clients and are responsible for engaging a barrister with the appropriate expertise for the case. barristers generally have little or no direct contact with their  lay clients  particularly without the presence or involvement of the solicitor. all correspondence  inquiries  invoices  and so on  will be addressed to the solicitor  who is primarily responsible for the barrister s fees. in court  barristers are often visibly distinguished from solicitors by their apparel. for example  in ireland  england  and wales  a barrister usually wears a horsehair wig  stiff collar  bands  and a gown. since january 2008  solicitor advocates have also been entitled to wear wigs  but wear different gowns.in many countries the traditional divisions between barristers and solicitors are breaking down. barristers once enjoyed a monopoly on appearances before the higher courts  but in great britain this has now been abolished  and solicitor advocates can generally appear for clients at trial. increasingly  firms of solicitors are keeping even the most advanced advisory and litigation work in-house for economic and client relationship reasons. similarly  the prohibition on barristers taking instructions directly from the public has also been widely abolished. but  in practice  direct instruction is still a rarity in most jurisdictions  partly because barristers with narrow specializations  or who are only really trained for advocacy  are not prepared to provide general advice to members of the public. historically  barristers have had a major role in trial preparation  including drafting pleadings and reviewing evidence. in some areas of law  that is still the case. in other areas  it is relatively common for the barrister to receive the brief from the instructing solicitor to represent a client at trial only a day or two before the proceeding. part of the reason for this is cost. a barrister is entitled to a  brief fee  when a brief is delivered  and this represents the bulk of her/his fee in relation to any trial. they are then usually entitled to a  refresher  for each day of the trial after the first. but if a case is settled before the trial 
the barrister is not needed and the brief fee would be wasted. some solicitors avoid this by delaying delivery of the brief until it is certain the case will go to trial.   === justification for a split profession === some benefits of maintaining the split include   having an independent barrister reviewing a course of action gives the client a fresh and independent opinion from an expert in the field distinct from solicitors who may maintain ongoing and long-term relationships with the client. in many jurisdictions  judges are appointed from the bar. since barristers do not have long-term client relationships and are further removed from clients than solicitors  judicial appointees are more independent. having recourse to all of the specialist barristers at the bar can enable smaller firms  who could not maintain large specialist departments  to compete with larger firms. a barrister acts as a check on the solicitor conducting the trial  if it becomes apparent that the claim or defence has not been properly conducted by the solicitor prior to trial  the barrister can (and usually has a duty to) advise the client of a separate possible claim against the solicitor. expertise in conducting trials  owing to the fact that barristers are specialist advocates. in many jurisdictions  barristers must follow the cab-rank rule  which obliges them to accept a brief if it is in their area of expertise and if they are available  facilitating access to justice for the unpopular.some disadvantages of the split include   a multiplicity of legal advisers can lead to less efficiency and higher costs  a concern to sir david clementi in his review of the english legal profession. because they are further removed from the client  barristers can be less familiar with the client s needs.a detailed examination of the justifications for a split legal profession and of the arguments in favour of a fused profession can be found in english solicitor peter reeve s 1986 book  are two legal professions necessary    == regulation ==  barristers are regulated by the bar for the jurisdiction where they practise  and in some countries  by the inn of court to which they belong. in some countries  there is external regulation. inns of court  where they exist  regulate admission to the profession. inns of court are independent societies that are titularly responsible for the training  admission (calling)  and discipline of barristers. where they exist  a person may only be called to the bar by an inn  of which they must first be a member. in fact  historically  call to and success at the bar  to a large degree  depended upon social connections made early in life.a bar collectively describes all members of the profession of barrister within a given jurisdiction. while as a minimum the bar is an association embracing all its members  it is usually the case  either de facto or de jure
 that the bar is invested with regulatory powers over the manner in which barristers practise.   == barristers around the world == in the common law tradition  the respective roles of a lawyer – that is as legal adviser and advocate – were formally split into two separate  regulated sub-professions  the other being the office of solicitor. historically  the distinction was absolute  but in the modern legal age  some countries that had a split legal profession now have a fused profession – anyone entitled to practise as a barrister may also practise as a solicitor  and vice versa. in practice  the distinction may be non-existent  minor  or marked  depending on the jurisdiction. in some jurisdictions  such as australia  scotland and ireland  there is little overlap.   === australia ===  in the australian states of new south wales  victoria and queensland  there is a split profession. nevertheless  subject to conditions  barristers can accept direct access work from clients. each state bar association regulates the profession and essentially has the functions of the english inns of court. in the states of south australia and western australia  as well as the australian capital territory  the professions of barrister and solicitor are fused  but an independent bar nonetheless exists  regulated by the legal practice board of the state or territory. in tasmania and the northern territory  the profession is fused  although a very small number of practitioners operate as an independent bar. generally  counsel dress in the traditional english manner (wig  gown  bar jacket and jabot) before superior courts  although this is not usually done for interlocutory applications. wigs and robes are still worn in the supreme court and the district court in civil matters and are dependent on the judicial officer s attire. robes and wigs are worn in all criminal cases. in western australia  wigs are no longer worn in any court. each year  the bar association appoints certain barristers of seniority and eminence to the rank of  senior counsel  (in most states and territories) or  queen s counsel  (in the northern territory  queensland  and victoria). such barristers carry the title  sc  or  qc  after their name. the appointments are made after a process of consultation with members of the profession and the judiciary. senior counsel appear in particularly complex or difficult cases. they make up about 14 per cent of the bar in new south wales.   === bangladesh === in bangladesh  the law relating to the barristers is the bangladesh legal practitioners and bar council order 1972 (president order no.46) as amended which is administered and enforced by the bangladesh bar council. bangladesh bar council is the supreme statutory body to regulate the legal professions in bangladesh and ensure educational standard and regulatory compliance by the advocates on roll of the bar council. the bar council
 with the help of government  prescribes rules to regulate the profession. all law graduates educating from home or abroad have to write and pass the bar council examination to be enrolled and admitted as professional advocates to practise law both as barristers & solicitors. the newly enrolled advocates are permitted to start practice in the lower (district) courts after admitting as members of the local (district) bar associations. after two years of practice in lower court  the advocates are eligible to be enrolled in the high court division of the supreme court of bangladesh. by passing the bar council examination  the advocates are issued with certificates of enrollment and permission in prescribed form to practise in the high court division of the supreme court also. only those advocates who became barristers in u.k. maintain their honorific title of barristers. in bangladesh there is an association called barristers  association of bangladesh that represents the such u.k. bases barristers.[10]   === canada === in canada (except quebec)  the professions of barrister and solicitor are fused  and many lawyers refer to themselves with both names  even if they do not practise in both areas. in colloquial parlance within the canadian legal profession  lawyers often term themselves as  litigators  (or  barristers )  or as  solicitors  depending on the nature of their law practice though some may in effect practise as both litigators and solicitors. however   litigators  would generally perform all litigation functions traditionally performed by barristers and solicitors  in contrast  those terming themselves  solicitors  would generally limit themselves to legal work not involving practice before the courts (not even in a preparatory manner as performed by solicitors in england)  though some might practise before chambers judges. as is the practice in many other commonwealth jurisdictions such as australia  canadian litigators are  gowned  but without a wig  when appearing before courts of  superior jurisdiction . all law graduates from canadian law schools  and holders of nca certificates of qualification (internationally trained lawyers or graduates from other law schools in common-law jurisdictions outside canada) from the federation of law societies of canada after can apply to the relevant provincial regulating body (law society) for admission (note here that the canadian provinces are technically each considered different legal jurisdictions).  prerequisites to admission as a member to a law society involve the completion of a canadian law degree (or completion of exams to recognize a foreign common law degree)  a year of articling as a student supervised by a qualified lawyer  and passing the bar exams mandated by the province the student has applied for a licence in.  once these requirements are complete then the articling student may be  called to the bar  after the review if their application and consideration of any  good character  issues at which they are presented to the court in a call ceremony. the applicant then becomes
a member of the law society as a  barrister and solicitor . the situation is somewhat different in quebec as a result of its civil law tradition. the profession of solicitor  or avoué  never took hold in colonial quebec  so attorneys (avocats) have traditionally been a fused profession  arguing and preparing cases in contentious matters  whereas quebec s other type of lawyer  civil-law notaries (notaires)  handle out-of-court non-contentious matters. however  a number of areas of non-contentious private law are not monopolized by notaries so that attorneys often specialise in handling either trials  cases  advising  or non-trial matters. the only disadvantage is that attorneys cannot draw up public instruments that have the same force of law as notarial acts. most large law firms in quebec offer the full range of legal services of law firms in common-law provinces. intending quebec attorneys must earn a bachelor s degree in civil law  pass the provincial bar examination  and successfully complete a legal internship to be admitted to practice. attorneys are regulated by the quebec law society (barreau du québec).   === france === in france  avocats  or attorneys  were  until the 20th century  the equivalent of barristers. the profession included several grades ranked by seniority  avocat-stagiaire (trainee  who was already qualified but needed to complete two years (or more  depending on the period) of training alongside seasoned lawyers)  avocat  and avocat honoraire (senior barrister). since the 14th century and during the course of the 19th and 20th in particular  french barristers competed in territorial battles over respective areas of legal practice against the conseil juridique (legal advisor  transactional solicitor) and avoué (procedural solicitor)  and expanded to become the generalist legal practitioner  with the notable exception of notaires (notaries)  who are ministry appointed lawyers (with a separate qualification) and who retain exclusivity over conveyancing and probate. after the 1971 and 1990 legal reforms  the avocat was fused with the avoué and the conseil juridique  making the avocat (or  if female  avocate) an all-purpose lawyer for matters of contentious jurisdiction  analogous to an american attorney. french attorneys usually do not (although it they are entitled to) act both as litigators (trial lawyers) and legal consultants (advising lawyers)  known respectively as avocat plaidant and avocat-conseil. this distinction is however purely informal and does not correspond to any difference in qualification or admission to the roll. all intending attorneys must pass an examination to be able to enrol in one of the centre régional de formation à la profession d avocat (crfpa) (regional centre for the training of lawyers). the crfpa course has a duration of two years and is a mix between classroom teachings and internships. its culmination is the stage final (final training)  where the intending attorney spends 6 months in a law firm (generally in his/her favoured field of practice and in a firm in which he/she hopes to
be recruited afterwards). the intending attorney then needs to pass the certificat d aptitude à la profession d avocat (capa)  which is the last professional examination allowing him/her to join a court s bar (barreau). it is generally recognised that the first examination is much more difficult than the capa and is dreaded by most law students. each bar is regulated by a bar council (ordre du barreau).   === germany === in germany  no distinction is made and lawyers may plead at all courts with the exception of the civil branch of the federal court of justice (bundesgerichtshof) to which fewer than fifty lawyers are admitted. those lawyers may not plead at other courts  almost only deal with litigation  and are usually instructed by a lawyer who represented the client in the lower courts. however  these restrictions do not apply to criminal cases  nor to pleadings at courts of the other court systems (labour  administrative  taxation  and social courts  as well as the eu court system).   === hong kong ===  the legal profession in hong kong is also divided into two branches  barristers and solicitors. in the high court and the court of final appeal  as a general rule  only barristers and solicitor-advocates are allowed to speak on behalf of any party in open court. this means that solicitors are restricted from doing so. in these two courts  barristers dress in the traditional english manner  as do the judges and other lawyers. in hong kong  the rank of queen s counsel was granted prior to the transfer of the sovereignty of hong kong from the united kingdom to china in 1997. after the handover  the rank has been replaced by senior counsel post-nominal letters  sc. senior counsel may still  however  style themselves as silks  like their british counterparts.   === india === in india  the law relating to the barrister is the advocates act  1961 introduced and thought up by ashoke kumar sen  the then law minister of india  which is a law passed by the parliament and is administered and enforced by the bar council of india. under the act  the bar council of india is the supreme regulatory body to regulate the legal profession in india and also to ensure the compliance of the laws and maintenance of professional standards by the legal profession in the country. for this purpose  the bar council of india is authorized to pass regulations and make orders in individual cases and also generally. each state has a bar council of its own whose function is to enroll the barristers willing to practise predominately within the territorial confines of that state and to perform the functions of the bar council of india within the territory assigned to them. therefore  each law degree holder must be enrolled with a (single) state bar council to practise in india. however  enrollment with any
state bar council does not restrict the barrister from appearing before any court in india  even though it is beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the state bar council which he is enrolled in. the advantage with having the state bar councils is that the workload of the bar council of india can be divided into these various state bar councils and also that matters can be dealt with locally and in an expedited manner. however  for all practical and legal purposes  the bar council of india retains with it  the final power to take decisions in any and all matters related to the legal profession on the whole or with respect to any  the process for being entitled to practise in india is twofold. first  the applicant must be a holder of a law degree from a recognized institution in india (or from one of the four recognised universities in the united kingdom) and second  must pass the enrollment qualifications of the bar council of the state where he/she seeks to be enrolled. for this purpose  the bar council of india has an internal committee whose function is to supervise and examine the various institutions conferring law degrees and to grant recognition to these institutions once they meet the required standards. in this manner the bar council of india also ensures the standard of education required for practising in india is met with. as regards the qualification for enrollment with the state bar council  while the actual formalities may vary from one state to another  yet predominately they ensure that the application has not been a bankrupt /criminal and is generally fit to practise before courts of india. enrollment with a bar council also means that the law degree holder is recognized as a barrister and is required to maintain a standards of conduct and professional demeanor at all times  both on and off the profession. the bar council of india also prescribes  rules of conduct  to be observed by the barristers in the courts  while interacting with clients and even otherwise.   === ireland === in the republic of ireland  admission to the bar by the chief justice of ireland is restricted to those on whom a barrister-at-law degree (bl) has first been conferred. the honorable society of king s inns is the only educational establishment which runs vocational courses for barristers in the republic and degrees of barrister-at-law can only be conferred by king s inns. king s inns are also the only body with the capacity to call individuals to the bar and to disbar them. most irish barristers choose to be governed thereafter by the bar council of ireland  a quasi-private entity. senior members of the profession may be selected for elevation to the inner bar  when they may describe themselves as senior counsel ( sc ). all barristers who have not been called to the inner bar are known as junior counsel (and are idenitifed by the postnominal initials
 bl )  regardless of age or experience. admission to the inner bar is made by declaration before the supreme court  patents of precedence having been granted by the government. irish barristers are sole practitioners and may not form chambers or partnerships if they wish to remain members of the bar council s law library. to practise under the bar council of ireland s rules  a newly qualified barrister is apprenticed to an experienced barrister of at least seven years  experience. this apprenticeship is known as pupillage or devilling. devilling is compulsory for those barristers who wish to be members of the law library and lasts for one legal year. it is common to devil for a second year in a less formal arrangement but this is not compulsory. devils are not generally paid for their work in their devilling year.   === israel === in israel  there is no distinction between barristers and solicitors  even though the judicial system is based mostly on english common law  as a continuation of the british mandate in palestine.   === japan === japan adopts a unified system. however  there are certain classes of qualified professionals who are allowed to practise in certain limited areas of law  such as scriveners ( shiho shoshi  qualified to handle title registration  deposit  and certain petite court proceedings with additional certification)  tax accountants ( zeirishi  qualified to prepare tax returns  provide advice on tax computation and represent a client in administrative tax appeals) and patent agents ( benrishi  qualified to practise patent registration and represent a client in administrative patent appeals). only the lawyers ( bengoshi ) can appear before court and are qualified to practise in any areas of law  including  but not limited to  areas that those qualified law-related professionals above are allowed to practise. most attorneys still focus primarily on court practice and still a very small number of attorneys give sophisticated and expert legal advice on a day-to-day basis to large corporations.   === netherlands === the netherlands used to have a semi-separated legal profession comprising the lawyer and the procureur  the latter resembling  to some extent  the profession of barrister. under that system  lawyers were entitled to represent their clients in law  but were only able to file cases before the court at which they were registered. cases falling under the jurisdiction of another court had to be filed by a procureur registered at that court  in practice often another lawyer exercising both functions. questions were raised on the necessity of the separation  given the fact that its main purpose – the preservation of the quality of the legal profession and observance of local court rules and customs – had become obsolete. for that reason  the procureur as a separate profession was abolished and its functions merged with the legal profession in 2008. currently  lawyers can file cases before any court  regardless
of where they are registered. the only notable exception concerns cases brought before the supreme court  which have to be handled by lawyers registered in the district of south holland  mainly for qualitative reasons.   === new zealand === in new zealand  the professions are not formally fused but practitioners are enrolled in the high court as  barristers and solicitors . they may choose  however  to practise as barristers sole. about 15% practise solely as barristers  mainly in the larger cities and usually in  chambers  (following the british terminology). they receive  instructions  from other practitioners  at least nominally. they usually conduct the proceedings in their entirety. any lawyer may apply to become a queen s counsel (qc) to recognize long-standing contribution to the legal profession but this status is only conferred on those practising as solicitors in exceptional circumstances. this step  referred to as  being called to the inner bar  or  taking silk  is considered highly prestigious and has been a step in the career of many new zealand judges. unlike other jurisdictions  the term  junior barrister  is popularly used to refer to a lawyer who holds a practising certificate as a barrister  but is employed by another  more senior barrister. generally  junior barristers are within their first five years of practise and are not yet qualified to practise as barristers sole. barristers sole (i.e. barristers who are not employed by another barrister) who are not queen s counsel are never referred to as junior barristers.   === nigeria === in nigeria  there is no formal distinction between barristers and solicitors. all students who pass the bar examinations – offered exclusively by the nigerian law school – are called to the nigerian bar  by the body of benchers. lawyers may argue in any federal trial or appellate court as well as any of the courts in nigeria s 36 states and the federal capital territory. the legal practitioner s act  refers to nigerian lawyers as legal practitioners  and following their call to the bar  nigerian lawyers enter their names in the register or roll of legal practitioners kept at the supreme court. perhaps for this reason  a nigerian lawyer is also often referred to as a barrister and solicitor of the supreme court of nigeria  and many nigerian lawyers term themselves barrister-at-law complete with the postnominal initials  b.l. . the vast majority of nigerian lawyers combine contentious and non-contentious work  although there is a growing tendency for practitioners in the bigger practices to specialise in one or the other. in colloquial parlance within the nigerian legal profession  lawyers may  for this reason  be referred to as  litigators  or as  solicitors . consistent with the practice in england and elsewhere in the commonwealth  senior members of the profession may be selected for elevation to the inner bar by conferment of the rank
of senior advocate of nigeria (san).   === pakistan === in pakistan to practice as a barrister  law graduates have to complete three steps. they have to pass the bar practice and training course (bptc)  be called to the bar by an inn of court from england and wales and attain a licence to practice as an advocate in the courts of pakistan from the relevant bar council  provincial or federal. however the profession in pakistan is fused and an advocate works both as a barrister and a solicitor  with higher rights of audience being provided.   === poland === in poland  there are two main types of legal professions  advocate and legal counsel. both are regulated and these professions are restricted only for people who graduated five-year law studies  have at least three years of experience and passed five difficult national exams (civil law  criminal law  company law  administrative law and ethic) or have a doctor of law degree. before 2015  the only difference was that advocates have a right to represent clients before the court in all cases and the legal advisors could not represent clients before the court in criminal cases. presently  the legal advisors can also represent clients in criminal cases so currently  the differences between this professions are only historical significance.   === south africa ===  in south africa the employment and practise of advocates (as barristers are known in south africa) is consistent with the rest of the commonwealth. advocates carry the rank of junior or senior counsel (sc)  and are mostly briefed and paid by solicitors (known as attorneys). they are usually employed in the higher courts  particularly in the appeal courts where they often appear as specialist counsel. south african solicitors (attorneys) follow a practice of referring cases to counsel for an opinion before proceeding with a case  when counsel in question practises as a specialist in the case law at stake. aspiring advocates currently spend one year in pupillage (formerly only six months) before being admitted to the bar in their respective provincial or judicial jurisdictions. the term  advocate  is sometimes used in south africa as a title  e. g.  advocate john doe  sc  ( advokaat  in afrikaans) in the same fashion as  dr. john doe  for a medical doctor.   === south korea === in south korea  there is no distinction between the judiciary and lawyers. previously  a person who has passed the national bar exam after two years of national education is able to become a judge  prosecutor  or  lawyer  in accordance to their grades upon graduation. as a result of changes from implementing an accommodated law school system  there are two standard means of becoming a lawyer. under the current legal system  to be a judge or a prosecutor  lawyers need to practise their legal knowledge. a  lawyer  does
not have any limitation of practice.   === spain === spain has a division but it does not correspond to the division in britain between barristers/advocates and solicitors. procuradores represent the litigant procedurally in court  generally under the authority of a power of attorney executed by a civil law notary  while abogados represent the substantive claims of the litigant through trial advocacy. abogados perform both transactional work and advise in connection with court proceedings  and they have full right of audience in front of the court. the court proceeding is carried out with abogados  not with procuradores. in a nutshell  procuradores are court agents that operate under the instructions of an abogado. their practice is confined to the locality of the court to which they are admitted.   === united kingdom ===   ==== england and wales ====  although with somewhat different laws  england and wales are considered within the united kingdom a single united and unified legal jurisdiction for the purposes of both civil and criminal law  alongside scotland and northern ireland  the other two legal jurisdictions within the united kingdom. england and wales are covered by a common bar (an organisation of barristers) and a single law society (an organisation of solicitors). the profession of barrister in england and wales is a separate profession from that of solicitor. it is  however  possible to hold the qualification of both barrister and solicitor at the same time. it is not necessary to leave the bar to qualify as a solicitor. barristers are regulated by the bar standards board  a division of the general council of the bar. a barrister must be a member of one of the inns of court  which traditionally educated and regulated barristers. there are four inns of court  the honourable society of lincoln s inn  the honourable society of gray s inn  the honourable society of the middle temple  and the honourable society of the inner temple. all are situated in central london  near the royal courts of justice. they perform scholastic and social roles  and in all cases  provide financial aid to student barristers (subject to merit) through scholarships. it is the inns that actually  call  the student to the bar at a ceremony similar to a graduation. social functions include dining with other members and guests and hosting other events. law graduates wishing to work and be known as barristers must take the bar professional training course (bptc – previously bar vocational course or bvc) at one of the institutions authorised by the bar council to offer the bptc. on successful completion of the bptc student barristers are  called  to the bar by their respective inns and are elevated to the degree of  barrister . however  before they can practise independently they must first undertake 12 months of pupillage. the first six months of this period is spent shadowing more senior practitioners  after which pupil barristers
may begin to undertake some court work of their own. following successful completion of this stage  most barristers then join a set of chambers  a group of counsel who share the costs of premises and support staff whilst remaining individually self-employed. in december 2014 there were just over 15 500 barristers in independent practice  of whom about ten percent are queen s counsel and the remainder are junior barristers. many barristers (about 2 800) are employed in companies as  in-house  counsel  or by local or national government or in academic institutions. certain barristers in england and wales are now instructed directly by members of the public. members of the public may engage the services of the barrister directly within the framework of the public access scheme  a solicitor is not involved at any stage. barristers undertaking public access work can provide legal advice and representation in court in almost all areas of law (see the public access information on the bar council website) and are entitled to represent clients in any court or tribunal in england and wales. once instructions from a client are accepted  it is the barrister (rather than the solicitor) who advises and guides the client through the relevant legal procedure or litigation. before a barrister can undertake public access work  they must have completed a special course. at present  about one in 20 barristers has so qualified. there is also a separate scheme called  licensed access  available to certain nominated classes of professional client  it is not open to the general public. public access work is experiencing a huge surge at the bar  with barristers taking advantage of the new opportunity for the bar to make profit in the face of legal aid cuts elsewhere in the profession. the ability of barristers to accept such instructions is a recent development  it results from a change in the rules set down by the general council of the bar in july 2004. the public access scheme has been introduced as part of the drive to open up the legal system to the public and to make it easier and cheaper to obtain access to legal advice. it further reduces the distinction between solicitors and barristers. the distinction remains however because there are certain aspects of a solicitor s role that a barrister is not able to undertake. some honorific suffixes to signify notable barristers may be esquire. even though the term barrister-at-law is sometimes seen  and was once very common  it has never been formally correct in england and wales. barrister is the only correct nomenclature.   ==== northern ireland ==== in april 2003 there were 554 barristers in independent practice in northern ireland. 66 were queen s counsel (qcs)  barristers who have earned a high reputation and are appointed by the queen on the recommendation of the lord chancellor as senior advocates and advisers. those barristers who are not qcs are called junior counsel and are styled  bl 
or  barrister-at-law . the term junior is often misleading since many members of the junior bar are experienced barristers with considerable expertise.benchers are  and have been for centuries  the governing bodies of the four inns of court in london and king s inns  dublin. the benchers of the inn of court of northern ireland governed the inn until the enactment of the constitution of the inn in 1983  which provides that the government of the inn is shared between the benchers  the executive council of the inn and members of the inn assembled in general meeting. the executive council (through its education committee) is responsible for considering memorials submitted by applicants for admission as students of the inn and by bar students of the inn for admission to the degree of barrister-at-law and making recommendations to the benchers. the final decisions on these memorials are taken by the benchers. the benchers also have the exclusive power of expelling or suspending a bar student and of disbarring a barrister or suspending a barrister from practice. the executive council is also involved with  education  fees of students  calling counsel to the bar  although call to the bar is performed by the lord chief justice of northern ireland on the invitation of the benchers  administration of the bar library (to which all practising members of the bar belong)  and liaising with corresponding bodies in other countries. the bar council is responsible for the maintenance of the standards  honour and independence of the bar and  through its professional conduct committee  receives and investigates complaints against members of the bar in their professional capacity.   ==== scotland ====  in scotland  an advocate is  in all respects except name  a barrister  but there are significant differences in professional practice. in scotland  admission to and the conduct of the profession is regulated by the faculty of advocates (as opposed to an inn).   ==== crown dependencies and uk overseas territories ====   ===== isle of man  jersey and guernsey ===== in the bailiwick of jersey  there are solicitors (called ecrivains) and advocates (french avocat). in the bailiwicks of jersey and guernsey and on the isle of man  advocates perform the combined functions of both solicitors and barristers.   ===== gibraltar ===== gibraltar is a british overseas territory boasting a legal profession based on the common law. the legal profession includes both barristers and solicitors with most barristers also acting as solicitors. admission and disciplinary matters in gibraltar are dealt with by the bar council of gibraltar and the supreme court of gibraltar. in order for barristers or solicitors to be admitted as practising lawyers in gibraltar they must comply with the supreme court act 1930 as amended by the supreme court amendment act 2015 which requires  amongst other things  for all newly admitted lawyers as of 1 july 2015 to undertake a year s course in gibraltar law at
the university of gibraltar. solicitors also have right of audience in gibraltar s courts.   === united states === the united states does not draw a distinction between lawyers as pleaders (barristers) and lawyers as agents (or solicitors). all lawyers who have passed a bar examination and have been admitted to practice may prosecute or defend in the courts of the state where they are admitted. historically  a distinction was made  and a separate label for barristers (called  counselors  hence the expression  attorney and counselor at law ) existed in certain states  though both professions have long since been fused into the all-purpose attorney. attorneys specializing in court procedure  combining advocacy and case preparation  are called trial attorneys or litigators. additionally  some state appellate courts require attorneys to obtain a separate certificate of admission to plead and practise in the appellate court. federal courts require specific admission to that court s bar to practise before it. at the state appellate level and in federal courts  there is generally no separate examination process  although some u.s. district courts require an examination on practices and procedures in their specific courts. unless an examination is required  admission is usually granted as a matter of course to any licensed attorney in the state where the court is located. some federal courts will grant admission to any attorney licensed in any u.s. jurisdiction. in st helena  crown counsel for community care is miss allison carter  who is acknowledged as an expert in her field and well respected within the entire community.   == popular culture == rumpole of the bailey (uk) - classic courtroom series kavanagh q.c. (1995–2001) (uk) north square (2000) (uk) - channel 4 court drama series contains interactions between barristers and solicitors bridget jones s diary (2001) - main character mark darcy is described as a  top barrister.  a fish called wanda (1988) - john cleese s character  archie leach  is a barrister who  in defending a hapless jewel thief  becomes entangled in the crime silk (2011–2014) (uk) - bbc court drama series rake (2010–2016) - australian tv series based on the story of a colourful barrister sydney carton - central character  a barrister  in charles dickens s a tale of two cities witness for the prosecution  in which the central character is the barrister sir wilfred robards  qc arnold timsh - target in the knife of dunwall  an expansion on the video game dishonored   == see also == barristers  ball legal professions in england and wales revising barrister special pleader serjeant-at-law   == references ==   == further reading == abel  richard l. the making of the english legal profession  1800-1988 (1998)  576pp lemmings  david. gentlemen and barristers  the inns of court and the english bar  1680-1730 (oxford 1990) levack  brian. the civil lawyers (oxford 1973) prest  wilfrid. the inns of court (1972)
prest  wilfrid. the rise of the barristers (1986)   == external links ==  barrister  . encyclopædia britannica. 3 (11th ed.). 1911. hong kong bar association (barristers in hong kong) law society of hong kong (solicitors in hong kong) at the library of congress web archives (archived 2006-07-23) canadian bar association   === australia === australian bar association (barristers in the commonwealth of australia) bar association of new south wales (australia) at the wayback machine (archived 2011-03-13) the victorian bar (australia) queensland bar association (australia) south australian bar association (australia) western australian bar association (australia) the northern territory bar association (australia)   === uk and ireland === the barrister magazine the inner temple bar council (barristers in england and wales) bar library of northern ireland faculty of advocates in scotland the bar of ireland the difference between barristers and solicitors open source legal search tool free access at the wayback machine (archived 2010-10-08) advice on structure and training for the bar barrister vs qc at the wayback machine (archived 2013-12-19)
a motorman is a person who operates a tram (streetcar)  electrified tram (trolley) car  light rail  or rapid transit train. a motorman is in charge of the motor (of the electric car) in the same sense as a railroad engineer is in charge of the engine. the term was (and  where still used  is) gender-neutral. though motormen have historically been male  females in the position (such as in the united states during the world wars) were usually also called motormen as a job title. the term has been replaced by more neutral ones  as gender-specific job titles have fallen into disuse  and because many systems employ large numbers of women in the position. on the new york city subway and london underground  the position is now called  train operator  (t/op). the operator of an electric locomotive or an electric multiple unit train on a commuter or mainline railroad is typically called an engineer or driver. the term may also refer to a person on a locomotive-hauled train when the train is being propelled by the locomotive. the driver is responsible for applying power in the locomotive  while the motorman (usually in a specially-built or converted vehicle) at the front of the train  is responsible for obeying signals  sounding the horn  and applying the brakes where necessary.
a chauffeur is a person employed to drive a passenger motor vehicle  especially a luxury vehicle such as a large sedan or limousine. a woman employed to drive a passenger motor vehicle is a chauffeuse. originally  such drivers  were often personal employees of the vehicle owner  but now in many cases specialist chauffeur service companies or individual drivers provide both driver and vehicle for hire  although there are service companies that just provide the driver.   == history == the term chauffeur comes from the french term for stoker because the earliest automobiles  like their railroad and sea vessel counterparts  were steam-powered and required the driver to stoke the engine. early petrol/gasoline-powered motor cars  before the advent of electric ignition  were ignited by  hot tubes  in the cylinder head which had to be pre-heated before the engine would start. hence the term chauffeur which  in this context  means something like  heater-upper . the chauffeur would prime the hot tubes at the start of a journey  after which the natural compression cycle of the engine would keep them at the correct temperature. the chauffeur also maintained the car  including routine maintenance and cleaning  and had to be a skilled mechanic to deal with breakdowns and tyre punctures en route  which were very common in the earliest years of the automobile. only the very wealthy could afford the first automobiles  and they generally employed chauffeurs rather than driving themselves. a 1906 article in the new york times reported that  the chauffeur problem to-day is one of the most serious that the automobilist has to deal with  and complained that  young men of no particular ability  who have been earning from $10 to $12 a week  are suddenly elevated to salaried positions paying from $25 to $50  and recommended the re-training of existing coach drivers.   == scope == while the term may refer to anybody who drives for a living  it usually implies a driver of an elegant passenger vehicle such as a horse-drawn carriage  luxury sedan  motor coach  or especially a limousine  those who operate buses or non-passenger vehicles are generally referred to as  drivers . in some countries  particularly developing nations where a ready supply of labor ensures that even the middle classes can afford domestic staff and among the wealthy  the chauffeur may simply be called the  driver . people currently sometimes employ chauffeurs full-time to drive themselves in their own personal vehicles  yet there are also professional services offering limousines or rental cars driven by chauffeurs. this is very similar to but more luxurious than taking a taxicab. a variety of benefits are cited for using chauffeurs  including convenience  productivity and time savings  and driving safety for businesspeople and seniors. insurance costs for luxury vehicles are often lower if the designated driver is a chauffeur.the legal requirements to be a
chauffeur vary depending on the local jurisdiction and class of vehicle. in some cases  a simple permit is all that is required  but in others an additional professional license with certain minimum standards in areas such as  age  health  driving experience  criminal record  local geographic knowledge  training attended.   == training == in addition to the minimum legal requirements  limousine companies often require their chauffeurs to undergo specific extra training. these courses may involve evasive driving or defensive driving techniques  the proper methods to ensure safety in the most extreme conditions such as inclement weather  a flat tire at high speeds  or other exterior influences for loss of vehicular control  etc. most companies also have their own courses as to what they expect from their chauffeurs. chauffeurs may be taught proper etiquette for use when they are in presence of their clientele. they may also be trained for services to the client beyond the car itself  such as for a personal valet or bodyguard. many companies and local licensing agencies currently require random drug screening – in the united states this was especially the case after professional ice hockey player vladimir konstantinov s career-ending injuries when his recently hired chauffeur  richard gnida  lost control of their limousine and crashed.   == dress == in many places (or at times in the past)  proper physical presence is presented by the chauffeur at all times. this usually includes a well-groomed individual  conservatively dressed in a clean and crisply pressed black or dark suit or tuxedo  dress shirt  and appropriately matching tie  with black leather gloves and freshly polished matching footwear. in some areas  such as japan  white gloves are the norm. some companies have complete uniforms for their chauffeurs  and some require that hats be worn as part of the uniform.   == notable chauffeurs == william grover-williams  chauffeur to william orpen julius schreck  chauffeur to adolf hitler from 1926 to 1936 kay summersby  chauffeuse to supreme commander allied expeditionary force dwight d. eisenhower roosevelt zanders  drove fidel castro  richard nixon  winston churchill  eleanor roosevelt  harry s. truman  and many others   === in fiction === aloysius  nosey  parker thomas watkins driving miss daisy frank martin  driver in the transporter series of films bitterman (ted ross)  chauffeur for arthur bach (dudley moore) in the 1981 film arthur tom branson  chauffeur turned son-in-law of lord grantham in downton abbey alfred pennyworth  bruce wayne s tireless valet  assistant  butler  chauffeur  confidant  best friend  and surrogate father figure bailey  chauffeur to the crosswire family in arthur female chauffeur in  desert rose  atra mixta  mikazuki augus  childhood friend and chauffeuse in the second season of mobile suit gundam  iron-blooded orphans kato the chauffeur and assistant to the green hornet   == references
==   == external links ==  media related to chauffeurs at wikimedia commons
magic  which encompasses the subgenres of illusion  stage magic  and close up magic  is a performing art in which audiences are entertained by tricks or illusions of seemingly impossible feats using natural means. it is to be distinguished from paranormal magic which are effects claimed to be created through supernatural means.  it is one of the oldest performing arts in the world. modern entertainment magic  as pioneered by 19th-century magician jean eugène robert-houdin  has become a popular theatrical art form. in the late 19th and early 20th centuries  magicians such as maskelyne and devant  howard thurston  harry kellar  and harry houdini achieved widespread commercial success during what has become known as  the golden age of magic . during this period  performance magic became a staple of broadway theatre  vaudeville  and music halls. magic retained its popularity in the television age  with magicians such as david copperfield  doug henning  penn & teller  and david blaine modernizing the art form.   == history == the term  magic  etymologically derives from the greek word mageia (μαγεία). in ancient times  greeks and persians had been at war for centuries  and the persian priests  called magosh in persian  came to be known as magoi in greek. ritual acts of persian priests came to be known as mageia  and then magika—which eventually came to mean any foreign  unorthodox  or illegitimate ritual practice. during the 17th century  many books were published that described magic tricks. until the 18th century  magic shows were a common source of entertainment at fairs. a founding figure of modern entertainment magic was jean eugène robert-houdin  who had a magic theatre in paris in 1845. john henry anderson was pioneering the same transition in london in the 1840s. towards the end of the 19th century  large magic shows permanently staged at big theatre venues became the norm. as a form of entertainment  magic easily moved from theatrical venues to television magic specials. performances that modern observers would recognize as conjuring have been practiced throughout history. for many recorded centuries  magicians were associated with the devil and the occult. during the 19th and 20th centuries  many stage magicians even capitalized on this notion in their advertisements. the same level of ingenuity that was used to produce famous ancient deceptions such as the trojan horse would also have been used for entertainment  or at least for cheating in money games. they were also used by the practitioners of various religions and cults from ancient times onwards to frighten uneducated people into obedience or turn them into adherents. however  the profession of the illusionist gained strength only in the 18th century  and has enjoyed several popular vogues since.   === magic tricks ===  opinions vary among magicians on how to categorize a given effect  but a number of categories have been developed. magicians may pull a
rabbit from an empty hat  make something seem to disappear  or transform a red silk handkerchief into a green silk handkerchief. magicians may also destroy something  like cutting a head off  and then  restore  it  make something appear to move from one place to another  or they may escape from a restraining device. other illusions include making something appear to defy gravity  making a solid object appear to pass through another object  or appearing to predict the choice of a spectator. many magic routines use combinations of effects.  one of the earliest books on the subject is gantziony s work of 1489  natural and unnatural magic  which describes and explains old-time tricks. in 1584  englishman reginald scot published the discoverie of witchcraft  part of which was devoted to debunking the claims that magicians used supernatural methods  and showing how their  magic tricks  were in reality accomplished. among the tricks discussed were sleight-of-hand manipulations with rope  paper and coins. at the time  fear and belief in witchcraft was widespread and the book tried to demonstrate that these fears were misplaced. popular belief held that all obtainable copies were burned on the accession of james i in 1603.during the 17th century  many similar books were published that described in detail the methods of a number of magic tricks  including the art of conjuring (1614) and the anatomy of legerdemain  the art of juggling (c. 1675).  until the 18th century  magic shows were a common source of entertainment at fairs  where itinerant performers would entertain the public with magic tricks  as well as the more traditional spectacles of sword swallowing  juggling and fire breathing. in the early 18th century  as belief in witchcraft was waning  the art became increasingly respectable and shows would be put on for rich private patrons. a notable figure in this transition was the english showman  isaac fawkes  who began to promote his act in advertisements from the 1720s – he even claimed to have performed for king george ii. one of fawkes  advertisements described his routine in some detail   he takes an empty bag  lays it on the table and turns it several times inside out  then commands 100 eggs out of it and several showers of real gold and silver  then the bag beginning to swell several sorts of wild fowl run out of it upon the table. he throws up a pack of cards  and causes them to be living birds flying about the room. he causes living beasts  birds  and other creatures to appear upon the table. he blows the spots of the cards off and on  and changes them to any pictures. from 1756 to 1781  jacob philadelphia performed feats of magic  sometimes under the guise of scientific exhibitions  throughout europe and in russia.   === modern stage magic ===
 a founding figure of modern entertainment magic was jean eugène robert-houdin  originally a clockmaker  who opened a magic theatre in paris in 1845. he transformed his art from one performed at fairs to a performance that the public paid to see at the theatre. his speciality was constructing mechanical automata that appeared to move and act as if alive. many of robert-houdin s mechanisms for illusion were pirated by his assistant and ended up in the performances of his rivals  john henry anderson and alexander herrmann. john henry anderson was pioneering the same transition in london. in 1840 he opened the new strand theatre  where he performed as the great wizard of the north. his success came from advertising his shows and captivating his audience with expert showmanship. he became one of the earliest magicians to attain a high level of world renown. he opened a second theatre in glasgow in 1845.  towards the end of the century  large magic shows permanently staged at big theatre venues became the norm. the british performer j n maskelyne and his partner cooke were established at the egyptian hall in london s piccadilly in 1873 by their manager william morton  and continued there for 31 years. the show incorporated stage illusions and reinvented traditional tricks with exotic (often oriental) imagery. the potential of the stage was exploited for hidden mechanisms and assistants  and the control it offers over the audience s point of view. maskelyne and cooke invented many of the illusions still performed today – one of his best-known being levitation.the model for the look of a  typical  magician—a man with wavy hair  a top hat  a goatee  and a tailcoat—was alexander herrmann (february 10  1844 – december 17  1896)  also known as herrmann the great. herrmann was a french magician and was part of the herrmann family name that is the  first-family of magic . the escapologist and magician harry houdini took his stage name from robert-houdin and developed a range of stage magic tricks  many of them based on what became known after his death as escapology. houdini was genuinely skilled in techniques such as lockpicking and escaping straitjackets  but also made full use of the range of conjuring techniques  including fake equipment and collusion with individuals in the audience. houdini s show-business savvy was as great as his performance skill. there is a houdini museum dedicated to him in scranton  pennsylvania. the magic circle was formed in london in 1905 to promote and advance the art of stage magic.as a form of entertainment  magic easily moved from theatrical venues to television specials  which opened up new opportunities for deceptions  and brought stage magic to huge audiences. famous magicians of the 20th century included okito  david devant  harry blackstone sr.  harry blackstone jr.  howard thurston  theodore annemann  cardini  joseph dunninger  dai vernon  fred culpitt  tommy wonder 
siegfried & roy  and doug henning. popular 20th- and 21st-century magicians include david copperfield  lance burton  james randi  penn and teller  david blaine  criss angel  hans klok  derren brown and dynamo. well-known women magicians include dell o dell and dorothy dietrich. most television magicians perform before a live audience  who provide the remote viewer with a reassurance that the illusions are not obtained with post-production visual effects. many of the principles of stage magic are old. there is an expression   it s all done with smoke and mirrors  used to explain something baffling  but effects seldom use mirrors today  due to the amount of installation work and transport difficulties. for example  the famous pepper s ghost  a stage illusion first used in 19th-century london  required a specially built theatre. modern performers have vanished objects as large as the taj mahal  the statue of liberty  and a space shuttle  using other kinds of optical deceptions.   == types of magic performance == magic is often described according to various specialities or genres.  stage illusions are performed for large audiences  typically within a theatre or auditorium. this type of magic is distinguished by large-scale props  the use of assistants and often exotic animals such as elephants and tigers. famous stage illusionists  past and present  include harry blackstone  sr.  howard thurston  chung ling soo  david copperfield  lance burton  siegfried & roy  and harry blackstone  jr. parlor magic  is done for larger audiences than close-up magic (which is for a few people or even one person) and for smaller audiences than stage magic. in parlor magic  the performer is usually standing and on the same level as the audience  which may be seated on chairs or even on the floor. according to the encyclopedia of magic and magicians by t.a. waters   the phrase [parlor magic] is often used as a pejorative to imply that an effect under discussion is not suitable for professional performance.  also  many magicians consider the term  parlor  old fashioned and limiting  since this type of magic is often done in rooms much larger than the traditional parlor  or even outdoors. a better term for this branch of magic may be  platform   club  or  cabaret . examples of such magicians include jeff mcbride  david abbott  channing pollock  black herman  and fred kaps. close-up magic (also known as micromagic or table magic) is performed with the audience close to the magician  sometimes even one-on-one. it usually makes use of everyday items as props  such as cards (see card manipulation)  coins (see coin magic)  and seemingly  impromptu  effects. this may be called  table magic  particularly when performed as dinner entertainment. ricky jay  mahdi moudini  and lee asher  following in the
traditions of dai vernon  slydini  and max malini  are considered among the foremost practitioners of close-up magic. escapology is the branch of magic that deals with escapes from confinement or restraints. harry houdini is a well-known example of an escape artist or escapologist. pickpocket magicians use magic to misdirect the audience while removing wallets  belts  ties and other personal effects. it can be presented on a stage  in a cabaret setting  before small close-up groups  or even for one spectator. well-known pickpockets include james freedman  david avadon  bob arno  and apollo robbins. mentalism creates the impression in the minds of the audience that the performer possesses special powers to read thoughts  predict events  control other minds  and similar feats. it can be presented on a stage  in a cabaret setting  before small close-up groups  or even for one spectator. well-known mentalists of the past and present include alexander  the zancigs  axel hellstrom  dunninger  kreskin  derren brown  rich ferguson  guy bavli  banachek  and alain nu. theatrical séances simulate spiritualistic or mediumistic phenomena for theatrical effect. this genre of stage magic has been misused at times by charlatans pretending to actually be in contact with spirits. children s magic is performed for an audience primarily composed of children. it is typically performed at birthday parties  preschools  elementary schools  sunday schools or libraries. this type of magic is usually comedic in nature and involves audience interaction as well as volunteer assistants. online magic tricks were designed to function on a computer screen. the computer essentially replaces the magician. some online magic tricks recreate traditional card tricks and require user participation  while others  like plato s cursed triangle  are based on mathematical  geometrical and/or optical illusions. one such online magic trick  called esmeralda s crystal ball  became a viral phenomenon that fooled so many computer users into believing that their computer had supernatural powers  that snopes dedicated a page to debunking the trick. mathemagic is a genre of stage magic that combines magic and mathematics. it is commonly used by children s magicians and mentalists. corporate magic or trade show magic uses magic as a communication and sales tool  as opposed to just straightforward entertainment. corporate magicians may come from a business background and typically present at meetings  conferences and product launches. they run workshops and can sometimes be found at trade shows  where their patter and illusions enhance an entertaining presentation of the products offered by their corporate sponsors. pioneer performers in this arena include eddie tullock and guy bavli. gospel magic uses magic to catechize and evangelize. gospel magic was first used by st. don bosco to interest children in 19th-century turin  italy to come back to school  to accept assistance and to attend church. street magic is a form of street performing or busking that employs a hybrid of stage magic 
platform and close-up magic  usually performed  in the round  or surrounded by the audience. notable modern street magic performers include jeff sheridan and gazzo. since the first david blaine tv special street magic aired in 1997  the term  street magic  has also come to describe a style of  guerilla  performance in which magicians approach and perform for unsuspecting members of the public on the street. unlike traditional street magic  this style is almost purely designed for tv and gains its impact from the wild reactions of the public. magicians of this type include david blaine and cyril takayama. bizarre magic uses mystical  horror  fantasy  and other similar themes in performance. bizarre magic is typically performed in a close-up venue  although some performers have effectively presented it in a stage setting. charles cameron has generally been credited as the  godfather of bizarre magic . others such as tony andruzzi have contributed significantly to its development. shock magic is a genre of magic that shocks the audience. sometimes referred to as  geek magic  it takes its roots from circus sideshows  in which  freakish  performances were shown to audiences. common shock magic or geek magic effects include eating razor blades  needle-through-arm  string through neck and pen-through-tongue.  comedy magic is the use of magic in which is combined with stand-up comedy. famous comedy magicians include the amazing johnathan  mac king  and penn & teller. quick change magic is the use of magic which is combined with the very quick changing of costumes. famous quick change artists include sos & victoria petrosyan. camera magic (or  video magic ) is magic that is aimed at viewers watching broadcasts or recordings. it includes tricks based on the restricted viewing angles of cameras and clever editing. camera magic often features paid extras posing as spectators who may even be assisting in the performance. camera magic can be done live  such as derren brown s lottery prediction. famous examples of camera magic include david copperfield s floating over the grand canyon and many of criss angel s illusions. classical magic is a style of magic that conveys feelings of elegance and skill akin to prominent magicians of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. notable classical magicians today include yu ho-jin and ryan lally.   == categories of effects == magicians describe the type of tricks they perform in various ways. opinions vary as to how to categorize a given effect  and disagreement as to what categories actually exist. for instance  some magicians consider  penetrations  a separate category  while others consider penetrations a form of restoration or teleportation. some magicians today  such as guy hollingworth and tom stone have begun to challenge the notion that all magic effects fit into a limited number of categories. among magicians who believe in a limited number of categories (such as dariel fitzkee  harlan tarbell  s.h. sharpe)  there has been disagreement
as to how many different types of effects there are. some of these are listed below.  production  the magician produces something from nothing—a rabbit from an empty hat  a fan of cards from thin air  a shower of coins from an empty bucket  a dove from a pan  or the magician himself or herself  appearing in a puff of smoke on an empty stage—all of these effects are productions. vanish  the magician makes something disappear—a coin  a cage of doves  milk from a newspaper  an assistant from a cabinet  or even the statue of liberty. a vanish  being the reverse of a production  may use a similar technique in reverse. transformation  the magician transforms something from one state into another—a silk handkerchief changes color  a lady turns into a tiger  an indifferent card changes to the spectator s chosen card.  restoration  the magician destroys an object—a rope is cut  a newspaper is torn  a woman is cut in half  a borrowed watch is smashed to pieces—then restores it to its original state. transposition  this is whereby two or more objects are used in play. the magician will cause these objects to change places  as many times as he pleases  and in some cases  ends with a kicker by transforming the objects into something else. transportation  the magician causes something to move from one place to another—a borrowed ring is found inside a ball of wool  a canary inside a light bulb  an assistant from a cabinet to the back of the theatre  or a coin from one hand to the other. when two objects exchange places  it is called a transposition  a simultaneous  double transportation. a transportation can be seen as a combination of a vanish and a production.  when performed by a mentalist it might be called teleportation. escape   the magician (or less often  an assistant) is placed in a restraining device (i.e.  handcuffs or a straitjacket) or a death trap  and escapes to safety. examples include being put in a straitjacket and into an overflowing tank of water  and being tied up and placed in a car being sent through a car crusher. levitation  the magician defies gravity  either by making something float in the air  or with the aid of another object (suspension)—a silver ball floats around a cloth  an assistant floats in mid-air  another is suspended from a broom  a scarf dances in a sealed bottle  the magician hovers a few inches off the floor. there are many popular ways to create this illusion  including asrah levitation  balducci levitation  and king levitation. the flying illusion has often been performed by david copperfield and more recently by peter marvey.  harry blackstone floated a light bulb over the heads of the public. penetration  the magician makes a solid
object pass through another—a set of steel rings link and unlink  a candle penetrates an arm  swords pass through an assistant in a basket  a salt shaker penetrates a tabletop  or a man walks through a mirror. sometimes referred to as  solid-through-solid . prediction  the magician accurately predicts the choice of a spectator or the outcome of an event—a newspaper headline  the total amount of loose change in the spectator s pocket  a picture drawn on a slate—under seemingly impossible circumstances.many magic routines use combinations of effects. for example  in  cups and balls  a magician may use vanishes  productions  penetrations  teleportation and transformations as part of the one presentation. the methodology behind magic is often referred to as a science (often a branch of physics) while the performance aspect is more of an art form.   == learning magic ==  dedication to magic can teach confidence and creativity  as well as the work ethic associated with regular practice and the responsibility that comes with devotion to an art. the teaching of performance magic was once a secretive practice. professional magicians were unwilling to share knowledge with anyone outside the profession to prevent the laity from learning their secrets. this often made it difficult for an interested apprentice to learn anything but the basics of magic. some had strict rules against members discussing magic secrets with anyone but established magicians. from the 1584 publication of reginald scot s discoverie of witchcraft until the end of the 19th century  only a few books were available for magicians to learn the craft  whereas today mass-market books offer a myriad titles. videos and dvds are a newer medium of tuition  but many of the methods found in this format are readily found in previously published books. however  they can serve as a visual demonstration. persons interested in learning to perform magic can join magic clubs. here magicians  both seasoned and novitiate  can work together and help one another for mutual improvement  to learn new techniques  to discuss all aspects of magic  to perform for each other—sharing advice  encouragement  and criticism. before a magician can join one of these clubs  they usually have to audition. the purpose is to show to the membership they are a magician and not just someone off the street wanting to discover magic secrets. the world s largest magic organization is the international brotherhood of magicians  it publishes a monthly journal  the linking ring. the oldest organization is the society of american magicians  which publishes the monthly magazine m-u-m and of which houdini was a member and president for several years. in london  england  there is the magic circle  which houses the largest magic library in europe. also psycrets—the british society of mystery entertainers—caters specifically to mentalists  bizarrists  storytellers  readers  spiritualist performers  and other mystery entertainers. davenport s magic in london s
the strand is the world s oldest family-run magic shop. the magic castle in hollywood  california  is home to the academy of magical arts. traditionally  magicians refuse to reveal the methods behind their tricks to the audience. membership in professional magicians  organizations often requires a commitment never to reveal the secrets of magic to non-magicians. magic performances tend to fall into a few specialties or genres. stage illusions use large-scale props and even large animals. platform magic is performed for a medium to large audience. close-up magic is performed with the audience close to the magician. escapology involves escapes from confinement or restraints. pickpocket magicians take audience members  wallets  belts  and ties.  mentalism creates the illusion that the magician can read minds. comedy magic is the use of magic combined with stand-up comedy  an example being penn & teller. some modern illusionists believe that it is unethical to give a performance that claims to be anything other than a clever and skillful deception. others argue that they can claim that the effects are due to magic. these apparently irreconcilable differences of opinion have led to some conflicts among performers. another issue is the use of deceptive practices for personal gain outside the venue of a magic performance. examples include fraudulent mediums  con men and grifters who use deception for cheating at card games.   == misuse of magic == some modern illusionists believe that it is unethical to give a performance that claims to be anything other than a clever and skillful deception. most of these performers therefore eschew the term  magician  (which they view as making a claim to supernatural power) in favor of  illusionist  and similar descriptions  for example  the performer jamy ian swiss makes these points by billing himself as an  honest liar . alternatively  many performers say that magical acts  as a form of theatre  need no more of a disclaimer than any play or film  this policy is advocated by the magician and mentalist joseph dunninger  who states  for those who believe  no explanation is necessary  for those who do not believe  no explanation will suffice. these apparently irreconcilable differences of opinion have led to some conflicts among performers. for example  more than thirty years after the illusionist uri geller made his first appearances on television in the 1970s to exhibit his self-proclaimed psychic ability to bend spoons  his actions still provoke controversy among some magic performers  because he claimed he was not using conjuring techniques. on the other hand  because geller bent—and continues to bend—spoons within a performance context  the dunninger quote may be said to apply. less fraught with controversy  however  may be the use of deceptive practices by those who employ conjuring techniques for personal gain outside the venue of a magic performance. fraudulent mediums have long capitalized on the popular belief in paranormal phenomena to prey on the bereaved
for financial gain. from the 1840s to the 1920s  during the greatest popularity of the spiritualism religious movement as well as public interest in séances  a number of fraudulent mediums used conjuring methods to perform illusions such as table-knocking  slate-writing  and telekinetic effects  which they attributed to the actions of ghosts or other spirits. the great escapologist and illusionist harry houdini devoted much of his time to exposing such fraudulent operators.  magician james randi  magic duo penn & teller  and the mentalist derren brown have also devoted much time to investigating and debunking paranormal  occult  and supernatural claims.fraudulent faith healers have also been shown to employ sleight of hand to give the appearance of removing chicken-giblet  tumors  from patients  abdomens.con men and grifters too may use techniques of conjuring for fraudulent goals. cheating at card games is an obvious example  and not a surprising one  one of the most respected textbooks of card techniques for magicians  the expert at the card table by erdnase  was primarily written as an instruction manual for card sharps. the card trick known as  find the lady  or  three-card monte  is an old favourite of street hustlers  who lure the victim into betting on what seems like a simple proposition  to identify  after a seemingly easy-to-track mixing sequence  which one of three face-down cards is the queen. another example is the shell game  in which a pea is hidden under one of three walnut shells  then shuffled around the table (or sidewalk) so slowly as to make the pea s position seemingly obvious. although these are well known as frauds  people still lose money on them  a shell-game ring was broken up in los angeles as recently as december 2009.   == researching magic == because of the secretive nature of magic  research can be a challenge. many magic resources are privately held and most libraries only have small populist collections of magicana. however  organizations exist to band together independent collectors  writers  and researchers of magic history  including the magic collectors  association  which publishes a quarterly magazine and hosts an annual convention  and the conjuring arts research center  which publishes a monthly newsletter and biannual magazine  and offers its members use of a searchable database of rare books and periodicals. performance magic is particularly notable as a key area of popular culture from the mid-19th to mid-20th centuries. many performances and performers can be followed through newspapers of the time. many books have been written about magic tricks  so many are written every year that at least one magic author has suggested that more books are written about magic than any other performing art. although the bulk of these books are not seen on the shelves of libraries or public bookstores  the serious student can find many titles through specialized stores catering to the needs
of magic performers. several notable public research collections on magic are the wg alma conjuring collection at the state library of victoria  the r. b. robbins collection of stage magic and conjuring at the state library of nsw  the  h. adrian smith collection of conjuring and magicana at brown university  and the carl w. jones magic collection  1870s–1948 at princeton university.   == see also ==  exposure (magic) intellectual rights to magic methods list of magicians magic in fiction   == references ==   == further reading == barrett  caitlín e.  plaster perspectives on  magical  gems  rethinking the meaning of  magic . cornell collection of antiquities. cornell university library. archived from the original on 26 may 2015. retrieved 24 august 2015. burlingame  h. j. (1895). history of magic and magicians. charles l. burlingame & company. christopher  maurine  christopher  milbourne (1996). the illustrated history of magic. heinemann. isbn 0-435-07016-9. christopher  milbourne (1962). panorama of magic. daniel  noel  caveney  mike  steinmeyer  jim  eds. (2009). magic. 1400-1950s. los angeles  taschen. isbn 978-3-8365-0977-0. dunninger  joseph. the complete encyclopedia of magic. nadis  fred  ed. (2006). wonder shows  performing science  magic  and religion in america. rutgers university press. frost  thomas (1876). the lives of the conjurors. tinsley brothers. hart  martin t. (2014). we know how they did it . piddington s secrets. manipulatist books global. price  david (1985). magic  a pictorial history of conjurers in the theatre. cornwall books. randi  james (1992). conjuring  a definitive history. new york  st. martin s press. isbn 0-312-08634-2. stebbins  robert a. (1993). career  culture and social psychology in a variety art  the magician. malabar  fl  krieger. hawk  mike. the illusionist . 1st ed. 01. tiverton  on  ibm  1999. 234–238. print. (hawk 234–238)   == external links == boston public library. magic posters state library of victoria (australia). magic and magicians research guide science  math and magic books  from the rare book and special collections division at the library of congress magic apparatus  from the rare book and special collections division at the library of congress
an academy (attic greek  ἀκαδήμεια  koine greek ἀκαδημία) is an institution of secondary education  higher learning  research  or honorary membership. academia is the worldwide group composed of professors and researchers at institutes of higher learning. the name traces back to plato s school of philosophy  founded approximately 385 bc at akademia  a sanctuary of athena  the goddess of wisdom and skill  north of athens  greece.   == etymology == the word comes from the academy in ancient greece  which derives from the athenian hero  akademos. outside the city walls of athens  the gymnasium was made famous by plato as a center of learning. the sacred space  dedicated to the goddess of wisdom  athena  had formerly been an olive grove  hence the expression  the groves of academe .in these gardens  the philosopher plato conversed with followers. plato developed his sessions into a method of teaching philosophy and in 387 bc  established what is known today as the old academy. by extension  academia has come to mean the cultural accumulation of knowledge  its development and transmission across generations as well as its practitioners and transmitters. in the 17th century  british  italian and french scholars used the term to describe types of institutions of higher learning.   == origins ==   === original academy ===  before akademia was a school  and even before cimon enclosed its precincts with a wall  it contained a sacred grove of olive trees dedicated to athena  the goddess of wisdom  outside the city walls of ancient athens. the archaic name for the site was hekademia  which by classical times evolved into akademia and was explained  at least as early as the beginning of the 6th century bc  by linking it to an athenian hero  a legendary  akademos . the site of akademia was sacred to athena and other immortals. plato s immediate successors as  scholarch  of akademia were speusippus (347–339 bc)  xenocrates (339–314 bc)  polemon (314–269 bc)  crates (ca. 269–266 bc)  and arcesilaus (ca. 266–240 bc). later scholarchs include lacydes of cyrene  carneades  clitomachus  and philo of larissa ( the last undisputed head of the academy ).  other notable members of akademia include aristotle  heraclides ponticus  eudoxus of cnidus  philip of opus  crantor  and antiochus of ascalon.   === neoplatonic academy of late antiquity ===  after a lapse during the early roman occupation  akademia was refounded as a new institution of some outstanding platonists of late antiquity who called themselves  successors  (diadochoi  but of plato) and presented themselves as an  uninterrupted tradition reaching back to plato.  however  there cannot have actually been any geographical  institutional  economic or personal continuity with the original academy in the new organizational entity.the last  greek  philosophers of the revived akademia
in the 6th century were drawn from various parts of the hellenistic cultural world and suggest the broad syncretism of the common culture (see koine)  five of the seven akademia philosophers mentioned by agathias were syriac in their cultural origin  hermias and diogenes (both from phoenicia)  isidorus of gaza  damascius of syria  iamblichus of coele-syria and perhaps even simplicius of cilicia.the emperor justinian closed the school in ad 529  a date that is often cited as the end of antiquity. according to the sole witness  the historian agathias  its remaining members looked for protection under the rule of sassanid king khosrau i in his capital at ctesiphon  carrying with them precious scrolls of literature and philosophy  and to a lesser degree of science. after a peace treaty between the persian and the byzantine empire in 532 guaranteed their personal security (an early document in the history of freedom of religion)  some members found sanctuary in the pagan stronghold of harran  near edessa. one of the last leading figures of this group was simplicius  a pupil of damascius  the last head of the athenian school. it has been speculated that akademia did not altogether disappear. after his exile  simplicius (and perhaps some others)  may have travelled to harran  near edessa. from there  the students of an academy-in-exile could have survived into the 9th century  long enough to facilitate the arabic revival of the neoplatonist commentary tradition in baghdad.   == ancient and medieval institutions ==   === ancient world ===   ==== greece and early europe ==== in ancient greece  after the establishment of the original academy  plato s colleagues and pupils developed spin-offs of his method. arcesilaus  a greek student of plato established the middle academy. carneades  another student  established the new academy. in 335 bc  aristotle refined the method with his own theories and established the lyceum in another gymnasium.   ==== africa ==== the musaeum  serapeum and library of alexandria egypt was frequented by intellectuals from africa  europe and asia studying various aspects of philosophy  language and mathematics. the university of timbuktu was a medieval university in timbuktu  present-day mali  which comprised three schools  the mosque of djinguereber  the mosque of sidi yahya  and the mosque of sankore. during its zenith  the university had an average attendance of around 25 000 students within a city of around 100 000 people.   ==== china ==== in china a higher education institution shang xiang was founded by shun in the youyu era before the 21st century bc. the imperial central academy at nanjing  founded in 258  was a result of the evolution of shang xiang and it became the first comprehensive institution combining education and research and was divided into five faculties in 470  which later became nanjing university. in the 8th century another kind of institution of learning emerged
 named shuyuan  which were generally privately owned. there were thousands of shuyuan recorded in ancient times. the degrees from them varied from one to another and those advanced shuyuan such as bailudong shuyuan and yuelu shuyuan can be classified as higher institutions of learning.   ==== india ==== taxila or takshashila  in ancient india  modern-day pakistan  was an early centre of learning  near present-day islamabad in the city of taxila. it is considered as one of the ancient universities of the world. according to scattered references which were only fixed a millennium later it may have dated back to at least the 5th century bc. some scholars date takshashila s existence back to the 6th century bc. the school consisted of several monasteries without large dormitories or lecture halls where the religious instruction was most likely still provided on an individualistic basis. takshashila is described in some detail in later jātaka tales  written in sri lanka around the 5th century ad.it became a noted centre of learning at least several centuries bc  and continued to attract students until the destruction of the city in the 5th century ad. takshashila is perhaps best known because of its association with chanakya. the famous treatise arthashastra (sanskrit for the knowledge of economics) by chanakya  is said to have been composed in takshashila itself. chanakya (or kautilya)  the maurya emperor chandragupta and the ayurvedic healer charaka studied at taxila.generally  a student entered takshashila at the age of sixteen. the vedas and the eighteen arts  which included skills such as archery  hunting  and elephant lore  were taught  in addition to its law school  medical school  and school of military science.  nalanda was established in the 5th century ad in bihar  india. it was founded in 427 in northeastern india  not far from what is today the southern border of nepal. it survived until 1197 when it was set upon  destroyed and burnt by the marauding forces of ikhtiyar uddin muhammad bin bakhtiyar khilji. it was devoted to buddhist studies  but it also trained students in fine arts  medicine  mathematics  astronomy  politics and the art of war.the center had eight separate compounds  10 temples  meditation halls  classrooms  lakes and parks. it had a nine-story library where monks meticulously copied books and documents so that individual scholars could have their own collections. it had dormitories for students  perhaps a first for an educational institution  housing 10 000 students in the university s heyday and providing accommodation for 2 000 professors. nalanda university attracted pupils and scholars from korea  japan  china  tibet  indonesia  persia and turkey.   === persia === the geographical position of persia allowed it to absorb cultural influences and ideas from both west and east. this include the spread of the greek form of schools in the new hellenistic cities built in persia after the invasion of
alexander the great.under the sasanians  syriac became an important language of the administration and intellectuals  rivaling greek. several cities developed centers of higher learning in the sasanian empire  including mosul  al-hira  and harran (famous for the pythagorean school of the sabeans). the grand school was the main center of learning in the persian capital ctesiphon  but little is known about it. perhaps the most famous center of learning in persia was the academy of gundishapur  teaching medicine  mathematics  astronomy  and logic. the academy was later instrumental in founding the muslim city of baghdad as a center of learning  and serving as the model for the first muslim hospital (bimaristan) at damascus.   ==== islamic world ====  founded in fes  university of al-karaouine in the 9th century and in cairo  al-azhar university in the 10th century  and in mali  the university of timbuktu in about 1100. mustansiriya madrasah in baghdad  iraq was established in 1227 as a madrasah by the abbasid caliph al-mustansir. its library had an initial collection of 80 000 volumes  given by the caliph. the collection was said to have grown to 400 000 volumes.   === medieval europe ===  in europe  the academy dates to the ancient greeks and romans in the pre-christian era. newer universities were founded in the 12th and 13th centuries  and the european institution of academia took shape. monks and priests moved out of monasteries to cathedral cities and other towns where they opened the first schools dedicated to advanced study. the most notable of these new schools were in bologna  salamanca  paris  oxford and cambridge  while others were opened throughout europe. the seven liberal arts — the trivium (grammar  rhetoric  and logic)  and the quadrivium (arithmetic  geometry  music  and astronomy) — had been codified in late antiquity. this was the basis of the curriculum in europe until newly available arabic texts and the works of aristotle became more available in europe in the 12th century. it remained in place even after the new scholasticism of the school of chartres and the encyclopedic work of thomas aquinas  until the humanism of the 15th and 16th centuries opened new studies of arts and sciences.   == renaissance academies in italy == with the neoplatonist revival that accompanied the revival of humanist studies  accademia took on newly vivid connotations.   === 15th-century accademie === during the florentine renaissance  cosimo de  medici took a personal interest in the new platonic academy that he determined to re-establish in 1439  centered on the marvellous promise shown by the young marsilio ficino. cosimo had been inspired by the arrival at the otherwise ineffective council of florence of gemistos plethon  who seemed a dazzling figure to the florentine intellectuals. in 1462 cosimo gave ficino a villa at careggi for the academy s use  situated where cosimo could see it from
his own villa  and drop by for visits.  the academy remained a wholly informal group  but one which had a great influence on renaissance neo-platonism.  in rome  after unity was restored following the western schism  humanist circles  cultivating philosophy and searching out and sharing ancient texts tended to gather where there was access to a library. the vatican library was not coordinated until 1475 and was never catalogued or widely accessible  not all popes looked with satisfaction at gatherings of unsupervised intellectuals. at the head of this movement for renewal in rome was cardinal bessarion  whose house from the mid-century was the centre of a flourishing academy of neoplatonic philosophy and a varied intellectual culture. his valuable greek as well as latin library (eventually bequeathed to the city of venice after he withdrew from rome) was at the disposal of the academicians. bessarion  in the latter years of his life  retired from rome to ravenna  but he left behind him ardent adherents of the classic philosophy. the next generation of humanists were bolder admirers of pagan culture  especially in the highly personal academy of pomponius leto  the natural son of a nobleman of the sanseverino family  born in calabria but known by his academic name  who devoted his energies to the enthusiastic study of classical antiquity  and attracted a great number of disciples and admirers. he was a worshipper not merely of the literary and artistic form  but also of the ideas and spirit of classic paganism  which made him appear a condemner of christianity and an enemy of the church. in his academy every member assumed a classical name. its principal members were humanists  like bessarion s protégé giovanni antonio campani (campanus)  bartolomeo platina  the papal librarian  and filippo buonaccorsi  and young visitors who received polish in the academic circle  like publio fausto andrelini of bologna who took the new learning to the university of paris  to the discomfiture of his friend erasmus. in their self-confidence  these first intellectual neopagans compromised themselves politically  at a time when rome was full of conspiracies fomented by the roman barons and the neighbouring princes  paul ii (1464–71) caused pomponio and the leaders of the academy to be arrested on charges of irreligion  immorality  and conspiracy against the pope. the prisoners begged so earnestly for mercy  and with such protestations of repentance  that they were pardoned. the letonian academy  however  collapsed.in naples  the quattrocento academy founded by alfonso of aragon and guided by antonio beccadelli was the porticus antoniana  later known as the accademia pontaniana  after giovanni pontano.   === 16th-century literary-aesthetic academies === the 16th century saw at rome a great increase of literary and aesthetic academies  more or less inspired by the renaissance  all of which assumed  as was the fashion  odd and fantastic names. we learn from various sources
the names of many such institutes  as a rule  they soon perished and left no trace. in the 1520s came the accademia degli intronati  for the encouragement of theatrical representations. there were also the academy of the  vignaiuoli  or  vinegrowers  (1530)  and the accademia della virtù (1542)  founded by claudio tolomei under the patronage of cardinal ippolito de  medici. these were followed by a new academy in the  orti  or farnese gardens. there were also the academies of the  intrepidi  (1560)  the  animosi  (1576)  and the  illuminati  (1598)  this last  founded by the marchesa isabella aldobrandini pallavicino. towards the middle of the 16th century there were also the academy of the  notti vaticane  or  vatican nights  founded by st. charles borromeo  an  accademia di diritto civile e canonico  and another of the university scholars and students of philosophy (accademia eustachiana). as a rule these academies  all very much alike  were merely circles of friends or clients gathered around a learned man or wealthy patron  and were dedicated to literary pastimes rather than methodical study. they fitted in  nevertheless  with the general situation and were in their own way one element of the historical development. despite their empirical and fugitive character  they helped to keep up the general esteem for literary and other studies. cardinals  prelates  and the clergy in general were most favourable to this movement  and assisted it by patronage and collaboration. in florence  the medici again took the lead in establishing the accademia e compagnia delle arti del disegno in 1563  the first of the more formally organised art academies that gradually displaced the medieval artists  guilds  usually known as the guild of saint luke  as the bodies responsible for training and often regulating artists  a change with great implications for the development of art  leading to the styles known as academic art.  the private accademia degli incamminati set up later in the century in bologna by the carracci brothers was also extremely influential  and with the accademia di san luca of rome (founded 1593) helped to confirm the use of the term for these institutions.   == 17th- and 18th-century academies in europe == gradually academies began to specialize on particular topics (arts  language  sciences) and began to be founded and funded by the kings and other sovereigns (few republics had an academy). and  mainly  since 17th century academies spread throughout europe.   === literary-philosophical academies === in the 17th century the tradition of literary-philosophical academies  as circles of friends gathering around learned patrons  was continued in italy  the  umoristi  (1611)  the  fantastici (1625)  and the  ordinati  founded by cardinal dati and giulio strozzi. about 1700 were founded the academies of the  infecondi  the
 occulti  the  deboli  the  aborigini  the  immobili  the  accademia esquilina  and others. during the 18th century many italian cities established similar philosophical and scientific academies. in the first half of the 19th century some of these became the national academies of pre-unitarian states  the academy of accesi became the panomitan academy of buon gusto (trento)  the academy of timidi became the royal academy of mantua  the accademia dei ricovrati became the galileiana academy of arts and science (padova)  the academy of dissonanti became the royal academy of modena and the academy of oscuri became the royal academy of lucca.   === academies of the arts === the académie de peinture et de sculpture in paris  established by the monarchy in 1648 (later renamed) was the most significant of the artistic academies  running the famous salon exhibitions from 1725.  artistic academies were established all over europe by the end of the 18th century  and many  like the akademie der künste in berlin (founded 1696)  the real academia de bellas artes de san fernando  in madrid (founded 1744)  the imperial academy of arts  in saint petersburg (1757)  the royal academy in london (1768) and the accademia di belle arti di brera in milan (1776) still run art schools and hold large exhibitions  although their influence on taste greatly declined from the late 19th century. a fundamental feature of academic discipline in the artistic academies was regular practice in making accurate drawings from antiquities  or from casts of antiquities  on the one hand  and on the other  in deriving inspiration from the other fount  the human form. students assembled in sessions drawing the draped and undraped human form  and such drawings  which survive in the tens of thousands from the 17th through the 19th century  are termed académies in french. similar institutions were often established for other arts  rome had the accademia di santa cecilia for music from 1585  paris had the académie royale de musique from 1669 and the académie royale d architecture from 1671.   === linguistic academies ===  the accademia degli infiammati of padova and the accademia degli umidi  soon renamed the accademia fiorentina  of florence were both founded in 1540  and were both initially concerned with the proper basis for literary use of the volgare  or vernacular language of italy  which would later become the italian language. in 1582 five florentine literati gathered and founded the accademia della crusca to demonstrate and conserve the beauty of the florentine vernacular tongue  modelled upon the authors of the trecento. the main instrument to do so was the vocabolario degli accademici della crusca. the crusca long remained a private institution  criticizing and opposing the official accademia fiorentina. the first institution inspired by the crusca was the fruitbearing society for german language  which existed from 1617 to 1680. the
crusca inspired richelieu to found in 1634 the analogous académie française with the task of acting as an official authority on the french language  charged with publishing the official dictionary of that language. the following year the académie received letters patent from the king louis xiii as the only recognized academy for french language. in its turn the state established académie was the model for the real academia española (founded in 1713) and the swedish academy (1786)  which are the ruling bodies of their respective languages and editors of major dictionaries. it also was the model for the russian academy  founded in 1783  which afterwards merged into the russian academy of sciences.   === academies of sciences ===  after the short-lived academia secretorum naturae of naples  the first academy exclusively devoted to sciences was the accademia dei lincei founded in 1603 in rome  particularly focused on natural sciences. in 1657 some students of galileo founded the accademia del cimento (academy of experiment) in florence  focused on physics and astronomy. the foundation of academy was funded by prince leopoldo and grand duke ferdinando ii de  medici. this academy lasted after few decades. in 1652 was founded the academia naturae curiosorum by four physicians. in 1677  leopold i  emperor of the holy roman empire  recognised the society and in 1687 he gave it the epithet leopoldina  with which is internationally famous.  p. 7–8   so  it became the academy of sciences for the whole holy roman empire. on 28 november 1660  a group of scientists from and influenced by the invisible college (gathering approximately since 1645) met at gresham college and announced the formation of a  college for the promoting of physico-mathematical experimental learning  which would meet weekly to discuss science and run experiments. in 1662 charles ii of england  signed a  royal charter which created the  royal society of london  then  royal society of london for the improvement of natural knowledge . in 1666 colbert gathered a small group of scholars to found a scientific society in paris. the first 30 years of the academy s existence were relatively informal  since no statutes had as yet been laid down for the institution.  in contrast to royal society  the academy was founded as an organ of government. in 1699  louis xiv gave the academy its first rules and named it académie royale des sciences. although prussia was a member of holy roman empire  in 1700 prince-elector frederick iii of brandenburg founded its own prussian academy of sciences upon the advice of gottfried leibniz  who was appointed president. during the 18th century many european kings followed and founded their own academy of sciences  in 1714 the academy of sciences of the institute of bologna  in 1724 the russian academy of sciences  in 1731 the royal dublin society  in 1735 in tuscany  in 1739 the royal swedish academy of sciences
 in 1742 the royal danish academy of sciences and letters  in 1751 the göttingen academy of sciences  in 1754 in erfurt  in 1759 the bavarian academy of sciences and humanities  in 1763  the academia theodoro-palatina in heidelberg  in 1779 the sciences academy of lisbon  in 1783 the royal society of edinburgh  in 1782 the accademia dei quaranta in rome  in 1784 in turin. this kind of academy lost importance after the university reform begun with the foundation of the university of berlin  when universities were provided with laboratories and clinics  and were charged with doing experimental research.   === academic societies ===  academic societies or learned societies began as groups of academics who worked together or presented their work to each other. these informal groups later became organized and in many cases state-approved. membership was restricted  usually requiring approval of the current members and often total membership was limited to a specific number. the royal society founded in 1660 was the first such academy. the american academy of arts and sciences was begun in 1780 by many of the same people prominent in the american revolution. academic societies served both as a forum to present and publish academic work  the role now served by academic publishing  and as a means to sponsor research and support academics  a role they still serve. membership in academic societies is still a matter of prestige in modern academia.   === military academies === at first such institutions only trained the artillery and military engineering officers  like the aula da artilharia (founded in 1641) and the aula de fortificação (1647) in lisbon  the real accademia di savoia in turin (opened in 1678)  the imperial artillery military academy of saint petersburg (1698)  the  royal military academy woolwich (1741)  the real colegio de artilleria in segovia (1764). starting at the end of the 16th century in the holy roman empire  france  poland and denmark  many knight academies were established to prepare the aristocratic youth for state and military service. many of them lately turned into gymnasiums  but some of them were transformed into true military academies. the royal danish military academy began to educate all officers for the royal danish army by request of king frederick iv in 1713. the école militaire was founded by louis xv of france in 1750 with the  aim of creating an academic college for cadet officers from poor families. the construction began in 1752  but the school did not open until 1760. the theresian military academy was founded on 14 december 1751 by maria theresa of austria. per year the academy accepted 100 noblemen and 100 commoners to start their education there. these were the model for the subsequent military academies throughout europe  like the reale accademia militare of naples in 1787 and the military academy karlberg in 1792.   == modern use of the term academy ==  the
term is used widely today to refer to anything from schools to learned societies to funding agencies to private industry associations. national academies are bodies for scientists  artists or writers that are usually state-funded and often are given the role of controlling much of the state funding for research into their areas  or other forms of funding.  some use different terms in their name – the british royal society for example.  the membership typically comprises distinguished individuals in the relevant field  who may be elected by the other members  or appointed by the government.  they are essentially not schools or colleges  though some may operate teaching arms.  the académie française was the most influential pattern for these. finland even has two separate  academies  academy of finland is a government-run funding agency  suomalainen tiedeakatemia is a learned society. the academy of motion picture arts and sciences  which presents the annual academy awards  is an example of a purely industry body using the name.  college-type specialized academies include the royal academy of music of the united kingdom  the united states military academy at west point  new york  the united states naval academy  united states air force academy  and the australian defence force academy. in emulation of the military academies  police in the united states are trained in police academies. because of the tradition of intellectual brilliance associated with this institution  many groups have chosen to use the word  academy  in their name  especially specialized tertiary educational institutions.  in the early 19th century  academy  took the connotations that  gymnasium  was acquiring in german-speaking lands  of school that was less advanced than a college (for which it might prepare students) but considerably more than elementary. early american examples are the prestigious preparatory schools of phillips andover academy  phillips exeter academy and deerfield academy.  in england   academy  had a specialized meaning for schools  but the edinburgh academy was more like the american examples.  academy was also used very loosely for various commercial training schools for dancing and the like. mozart organized public subscription performances of his music in vienna in the 1780s and 1790s  he called the concerts  academies . this usage in musical terms survives in the concert orchestra academy of st martin in the fields and in the brixton academy  a concert hall in brixton  south london. academies proliferated in the 20th century until even a three-week series of lectures and discussions would be termed an  academy . in addition  the generic term  the academy  is sometimes used to refer to all of academia  which is sometimes considered a global successor to the academy of athens.   === french regional academies overseeing education ===  in france  regional academic councils called academies are responsible for supervising all aspects of education in their region. the academy regions
are similar to  but not identical to  the standard french administrative regions. the rector of each academy is a revocable nominee of the ministry of education. these academies  main responsibility is overseeing primary and secondary education  but public universities are  in some respects also answerable to the academy for their region. however  french private universities are independent of the state and therefore independent of the regional academies.   === russian research academies === in imperial russia and soviet union the term  academy  or academy of sciences was reserved to denote a state research establishment  see russian academy of sciences. the latter one still exists in russia  although other types of academies (study and honorary) appeared as well.   === english school types ===   ==== tertiary education ====  from the mid-seventeenth to the 19th centuries  educational institutions in england run by nonconformist groups that did not agree with the church of england teachings were collectively known as  the dissenting academies . as a place at an english public school or university generally required conformity to the church of england  these institutions provided an alternative for those with different religious views and formed a significant part of england s educational system. university college london (ucl) was founded in 1826 as the first publicly funded english university to admit anyone regardless of religious adherence  and the test and corporation acts  which had imposed a wide range of restrictions on citizens who were not in conformity to the church of england  were abolished shortly afterwards  by the catholic relief act of 1829.   ==== primary and secondary education ====  in 2000  a form of  independent state schools  called  academies  were introduced in england. they have been compared to us charter schools. they are directly funded from central government rather than through local councils  and are partly privately sponsored. often the sponsors are from business  but some are sponsored by universities and charities. these schools have greater autonomy than schools run by the local councils. they are usually a type of secondary school  but some are  all through  schools with an integral primary school.  some of the early ones were briefly known as  city academies —the first such school opening on 10 september 2002 at the business academy bexley.the queen s speech  which followed the 2010 general election  included proposals for a bill to allow the secretary of state for education to approve schools  both primary and secondary  that have been graded  outstanding  by ofsted  to become academies. this was to be through a simplified streamlined process not requiring sponsors to provide capital funding.in 2012  the uk government began forcing some schools which had been graded satisfactory or lower into becoming academies  unilaterally removing existing governing bodies and head teachers in some cases. an example was downhills primary school in haringey 
where the head teacher refused to turn the school into an academy. ofsted were called in to assess the school  failed it  and both the head and the governing body were removed and replaced with a government-appointed board despite opposition from the school and parents.   === united states ===  prior to the twentieth century  education was not as carefully structured in the united states as it is in the twenty-first. there was not a rigid division between high school and colleges. in many cases  educational records were not kept nor diplomas issued. a reference to academia  in the united states  is to post-secondary education  especially the most elite or liberal arts part of it. however  an academy was what later became known as a high school. some older high schools  such as corning free academy  retained the term in their names (corning free academy  demoted to a middle school  closed in 2014). however  the united states military academy is a college. a number of colleges began as (high school) academies. academia began to splinter from its christian roots in 18th-century colonial america. in 1753  benjamin franklin established the academy and charitable school of the province of pennsylvania. in 1755  it was renamed the college and academy and charitable school of philadelphia. today  it is known as the university of pennsylvania. for the first time  academia was established as a secular institution. for the most part  church-based dogmatic points of view were no longer thrust upon students in the examination of their subjects of study. points of view became more varied as students were free to wander in thought without having to add religious dimensions to their conclusions. in 1819  thomas jefferson founded the university of virginia and developed the standards used today in organizing colleges and universities across the globe. the curriculum was taken from the traditional liberal arts  classical humanism and the values introduced with the protestant reformation. jefferson offered his students something new  the freedom to chart their own courses of study rather than mandate a fixed curriculum for all students. religious colleges and universities followed suit. the academy movement in the u.s. in the early 19th century arose from a public sense that education in the classic disciplines needed to be extended into the new territories and states that were being formed in the old northwest  in western new york  pennsylvania  ohio  michigan  indiana and illinois. dozens of academies were founded in the area  supported by private donations.   === germany === during the age of enlightenment in 18th-century europe  the academy started to change in europe. in the beginning of the 19th century wilhelm von humboldt not only published his philosophical paper on the limits of state action  but also directed the educational system in prussia for a short time. he introduced an academic system that was much more accessible to the lower classes. humboldt
s ideal was an education based on individuality  creativity  wholeness  and versatility. many continental european universities are still rooted in these ideas (or at least pay lip-service to them). they are  however  in contradiction to today s massive trend of specialization in academia.   == academic personnel ==  an academic is a person who works as a teacher or researcher at a university or other higher education institution. an academic usually holds an advanced degree. the term scholar is sometimes used with equivalent meaning to that of academic and describes in general those who attain mastery in a research discipline. it has wider application  with it also being used to describe those whose occupation was researched prior to organized higher education. academic administrators such as university presidents are not typically included in this use of the term academic  although many administrators hold advanced degrees and pursue scholarly research and writing while also tending to their administrative duties. in the united states  the term academic is approximately synonymous with that of the job title professor although in recent decades a growing number of institutions include librarians in the category of  academic staff . in the united kingdom  various titles of academic rank are used  typically research associate  research fellow (also senior research fellow and principal research fellow)  lecturer (also senior lecturer and principal lecturer)  reader  and professor. the colloquial term don is sometimes substituted for teaching staff at oxford and cambridge.   == structure == academia is usually conceived as divided into disciplines or fields of study. these have their roots in the subjects of the medieval trivium and quadrivium  which provided the model for scholastic thought in the first universities in medieval europe. the disciplines have been much revised  and many new disciplines have become more specialized  researching smaller and smaller areas. because of this  interdisciplinary research is often prized in today s academy  though it can also be made difficult both by practical matters of administration and funding and by differing research methods of different disciplines. in fact  many new fields of study have initially been conceived as interdisciplinary  and later become specialized disciplines in their own right – a recent example is cognitive science. most academic institutions reflect the divide of the disciplines in their administrative structure  being divided internally into departments or programs in various fields of study. each department is typically administered and funded separately by the academic institution  though there may be some overlap and faculty members  research and administrative staff may in some cases be shared among departments. in addition  academic institutions generally have an overall administrative structure (usually including a president and several deans) which is controlled by no single department  discipline  or field of thought. also  the tenure system  a major component of academic employment and research in the us  serves to ensure that academia is relatively protected from political
and financial pressures on thought.   === qualifications ===  the degree awarded for completed study is the primary academic qualification. typically these are  in order of completion  associate s degree  bachelor s degree (awarded for completion of undergraduate study)  master s degree  and doctorate (awarded after graduate or postgraduate study). these are only currently being standardized in europe as part of the bologna process  as many different degrees and standards of time to reach each are currently awarded in different countries in europe. in most fields the majority of academic researchers and teachers have doctorates or other terminal degrees  though in some professional and creative fields it is common for scholars and teachers to have only master s degrees.   === academic conferences ===  closely related to academic publishing is the practice of bringing a number of intellectuals in a field to give talks on their research at an academic conference  often allowing for a wider audience to be exposed to their ideas.   === conflicting goals === within academia  diverse constituent groups have diverse  and sometimes conflicting  goals. in the contemporary academy several of these conflicts are widely distributed and common. a salient example of conflict is that between the goal to improve teaching quality and the goal to reduce costs. the conflicting goals of professional education programs and general education advocates currently are playing out in the negotiation over accreditation standards. for example  the goals of research for profit and for the sake of knowledge often conflict to some degree.   ==== practice and theory ==== putting theory into practice can result in a gap between what is learned in academic settings and how that learning is manifested in practical settings. this is addressed in a number of professional schools such as education and social work  which require students to participate in practica for credit. students are taught to bridge the gap between theory and practice. not everyone agrees on the value of theory as opposed to practice. academics are sometimes criticized as lacking practical experience and thus too insulated from the  real world.  academic insularity is colloquially criticized as being  ivory tower  when used pejoratively  this term is criticized as anti-intellectualism. to address this split  there is a growing body of practice research  such as the practice-based research network (pbrn) within clinical medical research. arts and humanities departments debate how to define this emerging research phenomenon. there are a variety of contested models of practice research (practice-as-research  practice-based and practice through research)  for example  screen media practice research.   ==== town and gown ====  universities are often culturally distinct from the towns or cities where they reside. in some cases this leads to discomfort or outright conflict between local residents and members of the university over political  economic  or other issues. some localities in the northeastern united states  for instance  have tried to block
students from registering to vote as local residents—instead encouraging them to vote by absentee ballot at their primary residence—in order to retain control of local politics. other issues can include deep cultural and class divisions between local residents and university students. the film breaking away dramatizes such a conflict.   == academic publishing ==   === history of academic journals === among the earliest research journals were the proceedings of meetings of the royal society in the 17th century. at that time  the act of publishing academic inquiry was controversial  and widely ridiculed. it was not at all unusual for a new discovery to be announced as an anagram  reserving priority for the discoverer  but indecipherable for anyone not in on the secret  both isaac newton and leibniz used this approach. however  this method did not work well. robert k. merton  a sociologist  found that 92 percent of cases of simultaneous discovery in the 17th century ended in dispute. the number of disputes dropped to 72 percent in the 18th century  59 percent by the latter half of the 19th century  and 33 percent by the first half of the 20th century. the decline in contested claims for priority in research discoveries can be credited to the increasing acceptance of the publication of papers in modern academic journals. the royal society was steadfast in its unpopular belief that science could only move forward through a transparent and open exchange of ideas backed by experimental evidence. many of the experiments were ones that we would not recognize as scientific today—nor were the questions they answered. for example  when the duke of buckingham was admitted as a fellow of the royal society on june 5  1661  he presented the society with a vial of powdered  unicorn horn . it was a well-accepted  fact  that a circle of unicorn s horn would act as an invisible cage for any spider. robert hooke  the chief experimenter of the royal society  emptied the duke s vial into a circle on a table and dropped a spider in the centre of the circle. the spider promptly walked out of the circle and off the table. in its day  this was cutting-edge research.   === current status and development === research journals have been so successful that the number of journals and of papers has proliferated over the past few decades  and the credo of the modern academic has become  publish or perish . except for generalist journals such as science or nature  the topics covered in any single journal have tended to be narrow  and readership and citation have declined. a variety of methods for reviewing submissions exist. the most common involves initial approval by the journal  peer review by two or three researchers working in similar or closely related subjects who recommend approval or rejection as well as request error correction  clarification or additions before publishing. controversial topics may
receive additional levels of review. journals have developed a hierarchy  partly based on reputation but also on the strictness of the review policy. more prestigious journals are more likely to receive and publish more important work. submitters try to submit their work to the most prestigious journal likely to publish it to bolster their reputation and curriculum vitae. andrew odlyzko  an academician with a large number of published research papers  has argued that research journals will evolve into something akin to internet forums over the coming decade  by extending the interactivity of current internet preprints. this change may open them up to a wider range of ideas  some more developed than others. whether this will be a positive evolution remains to be seen. some claim that forums  like markets  tend to thrive or fail based on their ability to attract talent. some believe that highly restrictive and tightly monitored forums may be the least likely to thrive.   == academic dress ==  gowns have been associated with academia since the birth of the university in the 14th and 15th centuries  perhaps because most early scholars were priests or church officials. over time  the gowns worn by degree-holders have become standardized to some extent  although traditions in individual countries and even institutions have established a diverse range of gown styles  and some have ended the custom entirely  even for graduation ceremonies. at some universities  such as the universities of oxford and cambridge  undergraduates may be required to wear gowns on formal occasions and on graduation. undergraduate gowns are usually a shortened version of a bachelor s gown. at other universities  for example  outside the uk or u.s.  the custom is entirely absent. students at the university of trinity college at the university of toronto wear gowns to formal dinner  debates  to student government  and to many other places. in general  in the u.s. and uk recipients of a bachelor s degree are entitled to wear a simple full-length robe without adornment and a mortarboard cap with a tassel. in addition  holders of a bachelor s degree may be entitled to wear a ceremonial hood at some schools. in the u.s.  bachelor s hoods are rarely seen. bachelor s hoods are generally smaller versions of those worn by recipients of master s and doctoral degrees. recipients of a master s degree in the u.s. or uk wear a similar cap and gown but closed sleeves with slits  and usually receive a ceremonial hood that hangs down the back of the gown. in the u.s. the hood is traditionally edged with a silk or velvet strip displaying the disciplinary color  and is lined with the university s colors. according to the american council on education  six-year specialist degrees (ed.s.  etc.) and other degrees that are intermediate between the master s and the doctor s degree may have hoods specially designed (1) intermediate in length between the
master s and doctor s hood  (2) with a four-inch velvet border (also intermediate between the widths of the borders of master s and doctor s hoods)  and (3) with color distributed in the usual fashion and according to the usual rules. cap tassels should be uniformly black. recipients of a doctoral degree tend to have the most elaborate academic dress  and hence there is the greatest diversity at this level. in the u.s.  doctoral gowns are similar to the gowns worn by master s graduates  with the addition of velvet stripes across the sleeves and running down the front of the gown which may be tinted with the disciplinary color for the degree received. holders of a doctoral degree may be entitled or obliged to wear scarlet (a special gown in scarlet) on high days and special occasions. while some doctoral graduates wear the mortarboard cap traditional to the lower degree levels  most wear a cap or tudor bonnet that resembles a tam o shanter  from which a colored tassel is suspended. in modern times in the u.s. and uk  gowns are normally only worn at graduation ceremonies  although some colleges still demand the wearing of academic dress on formal occasions (official banquets and other similar affairs). in the 19th and early 20th centuries  it was more common to see the dress worn in the classroom  a practice which has now all but disappeared. two notable exceptions are oxford and a society at sewanee  where students are required to wear formal academic dress in the examination room.   == see also ==   == references ==   == bibliography == a. leight deneef and craufurd d. goodwin  eds. the academic s handbook. 2nd ed. durham and london  duke university press  1995. christopher j. lucas and john w. murry  jr. new faculty a practical guide for academic beginners. new york  modern language association  1992. john a. goldsmith  john komlosk and penny schine gold. the chicago guide to your academic career. chicago  university of chicago press  2002. william germano. getting it published  a guide for scholars (and anyone else)serious about serious books. chicago  university of chicago press  2001. kemp  roger l.  town and gown relations  a handbook of best practices  mcfarland and company  inc.  jefferson  north carolina  usa  and london  england  uk (2013). (isbn 978-0-7864-6399-2).   == further reading == alan cameron   the last days of the academy at athens  in proceedings of the cambridge philological society vol 195 (n.s. 15)  1969  pp 7–29. gerald bechtle  bryn mawr classical review of rainer thiel  simplikios und das ende der neuplatonischen schule in athen. stuttgart  1999 (in english). john glucker  antiochus and the late academy  göttingen 1978. francis haskell and nicholas penny  1981. taste and the antique  the lure of classical sculpture  1500–1900
(new haven  yale university press)   == external links ==  academia.edu – online community of academic scholars community contributor of academic harvard academia and web 2.0 an academic costume code and an academic ceremony guide bibliography on the history of the university  provided by palinurus  the academy and the corporation  a web site from the university of california  santa barbara  iiraj  – international institute of research and journals  magistri et scholares  – academic news and resources plato s academy  from the hellenic ministry of culture italian academies database (iad)
a scholar is a person who devotes themself to scholarly pursuits  particularly to the study of an area in which they have developed expertise. a scholar may also be an academic  a person who works as a teacher or researcher at a university or other higher education institution. an academic usually holds an advanced degree.   == definitions == the term scholar is sometimes used with equivalent meaning to that of academic and describes in general those who attain mastery in a research discipline. however  it has wider application  with it also being used to describe those whose occupation was researched prior to organized higher education. in 1847  minister emanuel vogel gerhart delivered an extensive address on the role of the scholar in society  writing   who is a scholar  the first reply that must be given is  he is a scholar whose whole inward intellectual and moral being has been symmetrically unfolded  disciplined and strengthened under the influence of truth. the different mental activities will always be exercised rightly when the proper equilibrium is preserved. no one faculty should be drawn out to the neglect of others. the whole inner man should be unfolded harmoniously. gerhart argued that a scholar can not be focused on a single discipline  contending that knowledge of multiple disciplines is necessary to put each into context and to inform the development of each   [t]o be a scholar involves more than mere learning. he may know much about very many things and yet know little or nothing right. knowledge without system or order is of no more service than useless lumber. a genuine scholar possesses something more  he penetrates and understands the principle and laws of the particular department of human knowledge with which he professes acquaintance. he imbibes the life of science. to know only one thing as it ought to be known constitutes a man more of a scholar than to know many things simply by rote. the man of one idea may be an object of ridicule  yet if his one idea is apprehended in its proper life and power  he is of far more account than if he had collected a number of notions  all jumbled together in his mind confusedly. the knowledge of a scholar becomes a part of himself  and does not hang around his soul like a broad-cloth coat about his shoulders. yielding himself to the plastic power of truth  as such  his mind is transfused and moulded by its energy and spirit. a more recent examination outlined the following attributes commonly accorded to scholars as  described by many writers  with some slight variations in the definition  the common themes are that a scholar is a person who has a high intellectual ability  is an independent thinker and an independent actor  has ideas that stand apart from others  is persistent in her quest for developing knowledge  is systematic  has unconditional integrity
 has intellectual honesty  has some convictions  and stands alone to support these convictions. scholars may rely on the scholarly method or scholarship  a body of principles and practices used by scholars to make their claims about the world as valid and trustworthy as possible  and to make them known to the scholarly public. it is the methods that systemically advance the teaching  research  and practice of a given scholarly or academic field of study through rigorous inquiry. scholarship is creative  can be documented  can be replicated or elaborated  and can be and is peer-reviewed through various methods.   == role in society == scholars have generally been upheld as creditable figures engaged in work important to the advance of society. in imperial china  in the period from 206 bc until ad 1912  the intellectuals were the scholar-officials ( scholar-gentlemen )  who were civil servants appointed by the emperor of china to perform the tasks of daily governance. such civil servants earned academic degrees by means of imperial examination  and also were skilled calligraphers  and knew confucian philosophy. historian wing-tsit chan concludes that   generally speaking  the record of these scholar-gentlemen has been a worthy one. it was good enough to be praised and imitated in 18th century europe. nevertheless  it has given china a tremendous handicap in their transition from government by men to government by law  and personal considerations in chinese government have been a curse. in joseon korea (1392–1910)  the intellectuals were the literati  who knew how to read and write  and had been designated  as the chungin (the  middle people )  in accordance with the confucian system. socially  they constituted the  petite bourgeoisie  composed of scholar-bureaucrats (scholars  professionals  and technicians) who administered the dynastic rule of the joseon dynasty.in his 1847 address  gerhart asserted that scholars have an obligation to constantly continue their studies so as to remain aware of new knowledge being generated  and to contribute their own insights to the body of knowledge available to all   the progress of science involves momentous interests. it merits the attention of all sincere lovers of truth. every one professing to be a scholar is under obligations to contribute towards the ever-progressive unfolding of its riches and power. not content with what is well known in reference to a great variety of subjects —not content with the imperfect views that have been acquired of many others  all genuine scholars  availing themselves fully of previous efforts  should combine their energies to bring to view what has eluded the keen vision of those men of noble intellectual stature who have lived and died before them. many scholars are also professors engaged in the teaching of others. in a number of countries  the title  research professor  refers to a professor who is exclusively or mainly engaged in research  and who has few
or no teaching obligations. for example  the title is used in this sense in the united kingdom (where it is known as research professor at some universities and professorial research fellow at some other institutions) and in northern europe. research professor is usually the most senior rank of a research-focused career pathway in those countries  and regarded as equal to the ordinary full professor rank. most often they are permanent employees  and the position is often held by particularly distinguished scholars  thus the position is often seen as more prestigious than an ordinary full professorship. the title is used in a somewhat similar sense in the united states  with the exception that research professors in the united states are often not permanent employees and often must fund their salary from external sources  which is usually not the case elsewhere.   == independent scholars == an independent scholar is anyone who conducts scholarly research outside universities and traditional academia. in the united states  a professional association exists for independent scholars  this association is the national coalition of independent scholars. in canada  the equivalent professional association is the canadian academy of independent scholars (in association with simon fraser university). similar organizations exist around the world. membership in a professional association generally entails a degree of post-secondary education and established research.   == see also == category scholars - the category of scholars  people who study a field scholarism (學民思潮) hong kong political movement scholarship scholasticism autodidacticism citizen science   == references ==   == external links == national coalition of independent scholars
a research fellow is an academic research position at a university or a similar research institution  usually for academic staff or faculty members. a research fellow may act either as an independent investigator or under the supervision of a principal investigator. in contrast to a research assistant  the position of research fellow normally requires a doctoral degree  or equivalent work experience for instance in industry and research centers. some research fellows undertake postdoctoral research or have some moderate teaching responsibilities. research fellow positions vary in different countries and academic institutions. in some cases  they are permanent with the possibility of promotion  while in other instances they are temporary.   == united kingdom == in many universities this position is a career grade of a research career pathway  following on from a postdoctoral position such as research associate  and may be open-ended  subject to normal probation regulations. within such a path  the next two higher career grades are usually senior research fellow and professorial fellow. although similar to the position of a research fellow  these two positions are research only posts  with the rise of the career grade there will normally be a formal requirement of a moderate amount of teaching and/or supervision (often at postgraduate level).  in some universities  research career grades roughly correspond to the grades of the teaching and scholarship career pathways in the following way  research fellow—lecturer  professorial fellow—professor  whereas senior research fellow is somewhere between a reader and a senior lecturer. however  at some top universities  a senior research fellowship may be a position of comparable academic standing to a full professorship at these universities  without any teaching requirements.in the past  the term research fellow often referred to a junior researcher  who worked on a specific project on a temporary basis. research fellows tended to be paid either from central university funds or by an outside organisation such as a charity or company  or through an external grant-awarding body such as a research council or a royal society  for example in the royal society university research fellowship. particularly in oxbridge style colleges  research fellows appointed as fellows of a college tended to  or still do  partially receive remuneration in form of college housing and subsistence. colleges may award junior research fellowships as the equivalent of post-doctoral research posts  lasting for three or four years.   == india == in india  the position of research fellowship is provided to scholars from various streams like science  arts  literature  management and others. research fellowship is funded by government academic and research institutes  and private companies as well. research fellows research under the supervision of experienced faculty  professor  head of department  dean on two different posts known as junior research fellow(jrf) and senior research fellow(srf). research organisations like icar  csir  ugc  icmr  serb recruit research fellows through national eligibility test. after
the completion of pre-defined tenure  jrf can be considered for senior research fellowship based on research fellow s performance & interview conducted by committee by research institute  research fellow is working with. there are multiple academic institutions that conduct research based fellow programmes in india. some of these institutions include institute of management technology  ghaziabad  indian institute of management calcutta  indian institute of management shillong  indian school of business mohali  national school of leadership pune and xlri - xavier school of management jamshedpur kunwar viyogi memorial trust uttar pradesh.   == russian federation == in the russian federation  the position and title research fellow is unknown  however  there is a broadly similar position of (russian  научный сотрудник  literally  scientific worker ). this position normally requires a degree of candidate of sciences approximately corresponding to the phd. more senior positions normally require  in addition to the aforementioned degree  a track record of publications or certified inventions  as well as practical contributions to major research and development projects.   == south africa == research fellows in south africa are considered as the best asset to research organisations and universities. there are highly ranked universities like university of the witwatersrand  university of stellenbosch business school  rhodes university which offers fellowship to south africa s nationals in a certain field of research.   == see also == fellow lecturer academic rank research assistant research associate   == references ==
professor (commonly abbreviated as prof.) is an academic rank at universities and other post-secondary education and research institutions in most countries. literally  professor derives from latin as a  person who professes  being usually an expert in arts or sciences  a teacher of the highest rank.in most systems of academic ranks the word  professor  only refers to the most senior academic position  sometimes informally known as  full professor .  in some countries or institutions  the word  professor  is also used in titles of lower ranks such as associate professor and assistant professor  this is particularly the case in the united states  where the word professor is sometimes used colloquially to refer to anyone in an academic post.  this colloquial usage would be considered incorrect among most other academic communities.  however  the unqualified title professor designated with a capital letter usually refers to a full professor also in english language usage. professors often conduct original research and commonly teach undergraduate  professional or postgraduate courses in their fields of expertise.  in universities with graduate schools  professors may mentor and supervise graduate students conducting research for a thesis or dissertation.  in many universities   full professors  take on senior managerial roles  leading departments  research teams and institutes  and filling roles such as president  principal or vice-chancellor.  the role of professor may be more public facing than that of more junior staff  and professors are expected to be national or international leaders in their field of expertise.   == etymology ==  the term  professor  was first used in the late 14th century to mean  one who teaches a branch of knowledge .  the word comes  ...from old french professeur (14c.) and directly from [the] latin professor[  for]  person who professes to be an expert in some art or science  teacher of highest rank  the latin term came from the  ...agent noun from profiteri  lay claim to  declare openly .  as a title that is  prefixed to a name  it dates from 1706 . the  [s]hort form prof is recorded from 1838 . the term  professor  is also used with a different meaning   [o]ne professing religion. this canting use of the word comes down from the elizabethan period  but is obsolete in england.    == description == a professor is an accomplished and recognized academic. in most commonwealth nations  as well as northern europe  the title professor is the highest academic rank at a university. in the united states and canada  the title of professor applies to most post-doctoral academics  so a larger percentage are thus designated.  in these areas  professors are scholars with doctorate degrees (typically ph.d. degrees) or equivalent qualifications who teach in four-year colleges and universities.  an emeritus professor is a title given to
selected retired professors with whom the university wishes to continue to be associated due to their stature and ongoing research.  emeritus professors do not receive a salary  but they are often given office or lab space  and use of libraries  labs  and so on.the term professor is also used in the titles assistant professor and associate professor  which are not considered professor-level positions in all european countries.  in australia  the title associate professor is used in place of the term reader as used in the united kingdom and other commonwealth countries  ranking above senior lecturer and below full professor.beyond holding the proper academic title  universities in many countries also give notable artists  athletes and foreign dignitaries the title honorary professor  even if these persons do not have the academic qualifications typically necessary for professorship and they do not take up professorial duties.  however  such  professors  usually do not undertake academic work for the granting institution.  in general  the title of professor is strictly used for academic positions rather than for those holding it on honorary basis.   == tasks ==  professors are qualified experts in their field who generally perform some or all the following tasks   managing teaching  research and publications in their departments (in countries where a professor is head of a department)  presenting lectures and seminars in their specialties (i.e.  they  profess )  performing  leading and publishing advanced original research in peer reviewed journals in their fields  providing pro bono community service  including consulting functions (such as advising government and nonprofit organizations) or providing expert commentary on tv or radio news or public affairs programs  mentoring graduate students in their academic training  mentoring more junior academic staff  conducting administrative or managerial functions  usually at a high level (e.g. deans  heads of departments  research centers  etc.)  and assessing students in their fields of expertise (e.g.  through grading examinations or viva voce defenses).other roles of professorial tasks depend on the institution  its legacy  protocols  place (country)  and time.  for example  professors at research-oriented universities in north america and  generally  at european universities  are promoted primarily on the basis of research achievements and external grant-raising success.   == around the world ==  many colleges and universities and other institutions of higher learning throughout the world follow a similar hierarchical ranking structure amongst scholars in academia  the list above provides details.   == salary ==  a professor typically earns a base salary and a range of benefits.  in addition  a professor who undertakes additional roles in their institution (e.g.  department chair  dean  head of graduate studies  etc.) earns additional income.  some professors also earn additional income by moonlighting in other jobs  such as consulting  publishing academic or popular press books  giving
speeches  or coaching executives. some fields (e.g.  business and computer science) give professors more opportunities for outside work.   === germany and switzerland === a report from 2005 by the  deutscher hochschulverband dhv  a lobby group for german professors  the salary of professors  the annual salary of a german professor is €46 680 in group  w2  (mid-level) and €56 683 in group  w3  (the highest level)  without performance-related bonuses. the anticipated average earnings with performance-related bonuses for a german professor is €71 500. the anticipated average earnings of a professor working in switzerland vary for example between 158 953 chf (€102 729) to 232 073 chf (€149 985) at the university of zurich and 187 937 chf (€121 461) to 247 280 chf (€159 774) at the eth zurich  the regulations are different depending on the cantons of switzerland.   === saudi arabia === according to the ministry of civil service  the salary of a professor in any public university is 344 497.5 sar  or us$91 866.   === spain ===  the salaries of civil servant professors in spain are fixed on a nationwide basis  but there are some bonuses related to performance and seniority and a number of bonuses granted by the autonomous regional governments. these bonuses include three-year premiums (spanish  trienios  according to seniority)  five-year premiums (quinquenios  according to compliance with teaching criteria set by the university) and six-year premiums (sexenios  according to compliance with research criteria laid down by the national government). these salary bonuses are relatively small. nevertheless  the total number of sexenios is a prerequisite for being a member of different committees. the importance of these sexenios as a prestige factor in the university was enhanced by legislation in 2001 (lou). some indicative numbers can be interesting  in spite of the variance in the data. we report net monthly payments (after taxes and social security fees)  without bonuses  ayudante  €1 200  ayudante doctor  €1 400  contratado doctor  €1 800  professor titular  €2 000  catedrático  €2 400. there are a total of 14 payments per year  including 2 extra payments in july and december (but for less than a normal monthly payment).   === education professors === professors in teacher education sometimes earn less than they would if they were still elementary classroom teachers. in one case study report  it was shown that a beginning full-time tenure-track assistant professor in elementary teacher education at california state university  northridge was hired in 2002 at a salary of $53 000  which was $15 738 less than she would have earned in her previous position as a 9-month public school kindergarten teacher  $68 738.   === netherlands === in 2007 the dutch social fund for the academic sector sofokles commissioned a comparative study of the wage structure of academic professions in the netherlands in relation to that
of other countries.  among the countries reviewed are the united states  the united kingdom  switzerland  germany  belgium  france  sweden and the netherlands.  to improve comparability  adjustments have been made to correct for purchasing power and taxes. because of differences between institutions in the us and uk these countries have two listings of which one denotes the salary in top-tier institutions (based on the shanghai-ranking).   === table of wages === the table below shows the final reference wages (per year) expressed in net amounts of dutch euros in 2014. (i.e.  converted into dutch purchasing power).   == research professor == in a number of countries  the title  research professor  refers to a professor who is exclusively or mainly engaged in research  and who has few or no teaching obligations. for example  the title is used in this sense in the united kingdom (where it is known as research professor at some universities and professorial research fellow at some other institutions) and in northern europe. research professor is usually the most senior rank of a research-focused career pathway in those countries  and regarded as equal to the ordinary full professor rank. most often they are permanent employees  and the position is often held by particularly distinguished scholars  thus the position is often seen as more prestigious than an ordinary full professorship. the title is used in a somewhat similar sense in the united states  with the exception that research professors in the united states are often not permanent employees and often must fund their salary from external sources  which is usually not the case elsewhere.   == in fiction ==  traditional fictional portrayals of professors  in accordance with a stereotype  are shy  absent-minded individuals often lost in thought. in many cases  fictional professors are socially or physically awkward. examples include the 1961 film the absent-minded professor or professor calculus of the adventures of tintin stories. professors have also been portrayed as being misguided into an evil pathway  such as professor metz  who helped bond villain blofeld in the film diamonds are forever  or simply evil  like professor moriarty  archenemy of british detective sherlock holmes. the modern animated series futurama has professor hubert farnsworth  a typical absent-minded but genius-level professor. a related stereotype is the mad scientist. vladimir nabokov  author and professor of english at cornell  frequently used professors as the protagonists in his novels. professor henry higgins is a main character in george bernard shaw s play pygmalion. in the harry potter series  set at the wizard school hogwarts  the teachers are known as professors  many of whom play important roles  notably professors dumbledore  mcgonagall and snape. in the board game cluedo  professor plum has been depicted as an absent-minded academic. christopher lloyd played plum s film counterpart  a psychologist who had an affair with one of his patients. since
the 1980s and 1990s  various stereotypes were re-evaluated  including professors. writers began to depict professors as just normal human beings and might be quite well-rounded in abilities  excelling both in intelligence and in physical skills. an example of a fictional professor not depicted as shy or absent-minded is indiana jones  a professor as well as an archeologist-adventurer  who is skilled at both scholarship and fighting. the popularity of the indiana jones movie franchise had a significant impact on the previous stereotype  and created a new archetype which is both deeply knowledgeable and physically capable. the character generally referred to simply as the professor on the television sit com series  gilligan s island  although described alternatively as a high-school science teacher or research scientist  is depicted as a sensible advisor  a clever inventor  and a helpful friend to his fellow castaways. john houseman s portrayal of law school professor charles w. kingsfield  jr.  in the paper chase (1973) remains the epitome of the strict  authoritarian professor who demands perfection from students. annalise keating (played by viola davis) from the american broadcasting company (abc) legal drama mystery television series how to get away with murder is a law professor at the fictional middleton university. early in the series  annalise is a self-sufficient and confident woman  respected for being a great law professor and a great lawyer  feared and admired by her students  whose image breaks down as the series progresses.mysterious  older men with magical powers (and unclear academic standing) are sometimes given the title of  professor  in literature and theater. notable examples include professor marvel in the wizard of oz and professor drosselmeyer (as he is sometimes known) from the ballet the nutcracker. also  the magician played by christian bale in the film  the prestige  adopts  the professor  as his stage name. a variation of this type of non-academic professor is the  crackpot inventor  as portrayed by professor potts in the film version of chitty chitty bang bang or the jerry lewis-inspired professor frink character on the simpsons. other professors of this type are the thoughtful and kind professor digory kirke of c.s. lewis  chronicles of narnia. the title has been used by comedians  such as  professor  irwin corey and soupy sales in his role as  the big professor . in the past  pianists in saloons and other rough environments have been called  professor . the puppeteer of a punch and judy show is also traditionally known as a  professor .   == see also == academic discipline adjunct professor sacrae theologiae professor (s.t.p.) – degree now awarded as s.t.d. or doctor of divinity (d.d.) emeritus habilitation scholarly method school and university in literature   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to professors at wikimedia commons  the dictionary definition of professor at wiktionary
a psychologist studies normal and abnormal mental states  perceptual  cognitive  emotional  and social processes and behavior by experimenting with  and observing  interpreting  and recording how individuals relate to one another and to their environments. most psychologists need a license to practice psychology. typically  psychologists need a doctoral degree in psychology  although a master s degree is sufficient in some situations. licensing and regulations can vary by country and profession. psychologists can work in applied or academic settings. academic psychologists educate higher-education students as well as conduct research  with graduate-level research being an important part of academic psychology. academic positions can be tenured or non-tenured  with tenured positions being highly desirable. applied psychology applies theory to solve problems in human and animal behavior. clinical psychology and counseling psychology are two fields of applied psychology that focus on therapeutic methods. other applied fields such as industrial and organizational psychology  forensic psychology  and others  aim to solve problems in business  government  industry  and similar fields.   == professional practice == psychologists can be seen as practicing within two general categories of psychology  applied psychology which includes  practitioners  or  professionals  and research-orientated psychology which includes  scientists  or  scholars . the training models endorsed by the american psychological association (apa) require that applied psychologists be trained as both researchers and practitioners  and that they possess advanced degrees. psychologists typically have one of two degrees  psyd or phd. the psyd program prepares the student only for clinical practice (e.g.  testing  psychotherapy). depending on the specialty (industrial/organizational  social  clinical  school  etc.)  a phd may be trained in clinical practice as well as in scientific methodology  to prepare for a career in academia or research. both the psyd and phd programs prepare students to take state licensing exams. within the two main categories are many further types of psychologists as reflected by the 56 professional classifications recognized by the apa  including clinical  counseling  and educational psychologists. such professionals work with persons in a variety of therapeutic contexts. people often think of the discipline as involving only such clinical or counseling psychologists. while counseling and psychotherapy are common activities for psychologists  these applied fields are just two branches in the larger domain of psychology. there are other classifications such as industrial  organizational and community psychologists  whose professionals mainly apply psychological research  theories  and techniques to  real-world  problems of business  industry  social benefit organizations  government  and academia.   === clinical and counseling psychologists === clinical and counseling psychologists can offer a range of professional services  including  providing psychological treatment (psychotherapy) administering and interpreting psychological assessment and testing conducting psychological research teaching developing prevention programs consulting (especially with schools and businesses) program administration providing expert testimony (forensics)in practice  clinical and counseling psychologists might work with individuals  couples 
families  or groups in a variety of settings  including private practices  hospitals  mental health organizations  schools  businesses  and non-profit agencies. most clinical and counseling who engage in research and teaching do so within a college or university setting. clinical and counseling psychologists may also choose to specialize in a particular field. common areas of specialization  some of which can earn board certification  include  specific disorders (e.g. trauma  addiction  eating and sleep disorders  sexual dysfunction  depression  anxiety  or phobias) neuropsychological disorders child and adolescent psychology family and relationship counseling health psychology sport psychology forensic psychology industrial and organizational psychology educational psychologyclinical and counseling psychologists receive training in a number of psychological therapies  including behavioral  cognitive  humanistic  existential  psychodynamic  and systemic approaches  as well as in-depth training in psychological testing  and to some extent  neuropsychological testing.   === contrasted with psychiatrists ===  although clinical and counseling psychologists and psychiatrists share the same fundamental aim—the alleviation of mental distress—their training  outlook  and methodologies are often different. perhaps the most significant difference is that psychiatrists are licensed physicians  and  as such  psychiatrists are apt to use the medical model to assess mental health problems and to also employ psychotropic medications as a method of addressing mental health problems.psychologists generally do not prescribe medication  although in some jurisdictions they do have prescription privileges. in five us states (new mexico  louisiana  illinois  iowa  and idaho)  psychologists with post-doctoral clinical psychopharmacology training have been granted prescriptive authority for mental health disorders.clinical and counseling psychologists receive extensive training in psychological test administration  scoring  interpretation  and reporting  while psychiatrists are not trained in psychological testing. in addition  psychologists (particularly those from ph.d. programs) spend several years in graduate school being trained to conduct behavioral research  their training includes research design and advanced statistical analysis. while this training is available for physicians via dual md/ph.d. programs  it is not typically included in standard medical education  although psychiatrists may develop research skills during their residency or a psychiatry fellowship (post-residency). psychologists from psy.d. programs tend to have more training and experience in clinical practice (e.g. psychotherapy  testing) than those from ph.d. programs. psychiatrists  as licensed physicians  have been trained more intensively in other areas  such as internal medicine and neurology  and may bring this knowledge to bear in identifying and treating medical or neurological conditions that present with primarily psychological symptoms such as depression  anxiety  or paranoia  e.g.  hypothyroidism presenting with depressive symptoms  or pulmonary embolism with significant apprehension and anxiety.   == licensing and regulations == to become a psychologist  a person often completes a degree in psychology  but in other jurisdictions the course of study may be different and the activities performed may be similar to those of other professionals.  
=== australia === in australia  the psychology profession  and the use of the title  psychologist  is regulated by an act of parliament  the health practitioner regulation (administrative arrangements) national law act 2008  following an agreement between state and territorial governments. under this national law  registration of psychologists is administered by the psychology board of australia (psyba). before july 2010  the professional registration of psychologists was governed by various state and territorial psychology registration boards. the australian psychology accreditation council (apac) oversees education standards for the profession. the minimum requirements for general registration in psychology  including the right to use the title  psychologist  are an apac approved four-year degree in psychology followed by either a two-year master s program or two years of practice supervised by a registered psychologist. however  ahpra (australian health practitioner regulation agency) is currently in the process of phasing out the 4 + 2 internship pathway. once the 4 + 2 pathway is phased out  a master s degree or phd will be required to become a psychologist in australia. this is because of concerns about public safety  and to reduce the burden of training on employers. there is also a  5 + 1  registration pathway  including a four-year apac approved degree followed by one year of postgraduate study and one year of supervised practice. endorsement within a specific area of practice (e.g. clinical neuropsychology  clinical  community  counselling  educational and developmental  forensic  health  organisational or sport and exercise) requires additional qualifications. these notations are not  specialist  titles (western australian psychologists could use  specialist  in their titles during a three-year transitional period from 17 october 2010 to 17 october 2013).membership with australian psychological society (aps) differs from registration as a psychologist. the standard route to full membership (maps) of the aps usually requires four years of apac-accredited undergraduate study  plus a master s or doctorate in psychology from an accredited institution. an alternate route is available for academics and practitioners who have gained appropriate experience and made a substantial contribution to the field of psychology. restrictions apply to all individuals using the title  psychologist  in all states and territories of australia. however  the terms  psychotherapist   social worker  and  counselor  are currently self-regulated  with several organizations campaigning for government regulation.   === belgium === since 1933  the title  psychologist  has been protected by law in belgium. it can only be used by people who are on the national government commission list. the minimum requirement is the completion of five years of university training in psychology (master s degree or equivalent). the title of  psychotherapist  is not legally protected. as of 2016  belgian law recognizes the clinical psychologist as an autonomous health profession. it reserves the practice of psychotherapy to medical doctors  clinical psychologists and clinical orthopedagogists.   === finland === in finland 
the title  psychologist  is protected by law. the restriction for psychologists (licensed professionals) is governed by national supervisory authority for welfare and health (finland) (valvira). it takes 330 ects-credits (about six years) to complete the university studies (master s degree). there are about 6 200 licensed psychologists in finland.   === germany === in germany  the use of the title diplom-psychologe (dipl.-psych.) is restricted by law  and a practitioner is legally required to hold the corresponding academic title  which is comparable to a higher m.sc. degree and requires at least five years of training at a university. originally  a diploma degree in psychology awarded in germany included the subject of clinical psychology. with the bologna-reform  this degree was replaced by a master s degree. the academic degree of diplom-psychologe or m.sc. (psychologie) does not include a psychotherapeutic qualification  which requires three to five years of additional training. the psychotherapeutic training combines in-depth theoretical knowledge with supervised patient care and self-reflection units. after having completed the training requirements  psychologists take a state-run exam  which  upon successful completion (approbation)  confers the official title of  psychological psychotherapist  (psychologischer psychotherapeut). after many years of inter-professional political controversy  non-physician psychotherapy was given an adequate legal foundation through the creation of two new academic healthcare professions.   === greece === since 1979  the title  psychologist  has been protected by law in greece. it can only be used by people who hold a relevant license or certificate  which is issued by the greek authorities  to practice as a psychologist. the minimum requirement is the completion of university training in psychology at a greek university  or at a university recognized by the greek authorities. psychologists in greece are legally required to abide by the code of conduct of psychologists (2019). psychologists in greece are not required to register with any psychology body in the country in order to legally practice the profession.   === the netherlands === in the netherlands  the title of  psychologist  is not restricted by law. the dutch professional association of psychologists (nip)  using trademark law  posited its own title  psychologist nip  (psycholoog nip). this title is granted exclusively to holders of a master s degree in psychology after a year of postgraduate experience. the titles  psychotherapist  (psychotherapeut) and  healthcare psychologist  (gz-psycholoog for gezondheidszorgpsycholoog) are restricted through the individual healthcare professions act (wet big) to those who have followed further postgraduate (psyd/dpsych or licentiate level) training. the use of the titles  clinical psychologist  (klinisch psycholoog) and  clinical neuropsychologist  (klinisch neuropsycholoog) are reserved for those who have followed specialist post-licentiate training.   === new zealand === in new zealand  the use of the title  psychologist  is restricted by law. prior to 2004  only the title  registered psychologist  was restricted to people qualified and registered as such. however  with the proclamation of
the health practitioners competence assurance act  in 2003  the use of the title  psychologist  was limited to practitioners registered with the new zealand psychologists board. the titles  clinical psychologist   counseling psychologist   educational psychologist   intern psychologist  and  trainee psychologist  are similarly protected. this is to protect the public by providing assurance that the title-holder is registered and therefore qualified and competent to practice  and can be held accountable. the legislation does not include an exemption clause for any class of practitioner (e.g.  academics  or government employees).   === south africa ===  in south africa  psychologists are qualified in either clinical  counseling  educational  organizational  or research psychology. to become qualified  one must complete a recognized master s degree in psychology  an appropriate practicum at a recognized training institution  and take an examination set by the professional board for psychology. registration with the health professions council of south africa (hpcsa) is required and includes a continuing professional development component. the practicum usually involves a full year internship  and in some specializations  the hpcsa requires completion of an additional year of community service. the master s program consists of a seminar  coursework-based theoretical and practical training  a dissertation of limited scope  and is (in most cases) two years in duration. prior to enrolling in the master s program  the student studies psychology for three years as an undergraduate (b.a. or b.sc.  and  for organizational psychology  also b.com.)  followed by an additional postgraduate honours degree in psychology  see list of universities in south africa. qualification thus requires at least five years of study and at least one internship. the undergraduate b.psyc. is a four-year program integrating theory and practical training  and—with the required examination set by the professional board for psychology—is sufficient for practice as a psychometrist or counselor.   === sweden === in sweden  the title  psychologist  is restricted by law. it can only be used after receiving a license from the government. the basic requirements are a completed five-year specialized course in psychology (the equivalent of a master s degree) and twelve months of practice under supervision. all other uses are banned  though often challenged. the title  psychotherapist  is governed by similar rules  but the basic educational demands require another one-and-a-half years (spread out over three years) in a specialized course in psychotherapy (courses vary regarding theory)  in addition to an academic-level degree within a field concerning the treatment of people (psychologist  social worker  psychiatrist).   === united kingdom === in the uk   registered psychologist  and  practitioner psychologist  are protected titles. the title of  neuropsychologist  is not protected.  in addition  the following specialist titles are also protected by law   clinical psychologist   counselling psychologist   educational psychologist   forensic psychologist
  health psychologist   occupational psychologist  and  sport and exercise psychologist . the health and care professions council (hcpc) is the statutory regulator for practitioner psychologists in the uk. in the uk  the use of the title  chartered psychologist  is also protected by statutory regulation  but that title simply means that the psychologist is a chartered member of the british psychological society  but is not necessarily registered with the hcpc. however  it is an offense for someone who is not in the appropriate section of the hcpc register to provide psychological services. the requirement to register as a clinical  counseling  or educational psychologist is a professional doctorate (and in the case of the latter two the british psychological society s professional qualification  which meets the standards of a professional doctorate). the title of  psychologist  by itself  is not protected. the british psychological society is working with the hcpc to ensure that the title of  neuropsychologist  is regulated as a specialist title for practitioner psychologists.in the uk  clinical psychologists undertake a doctorate in clinical psychology (d.clin.psych.  clin.psy.d.  or similar)  which has both clinical and research components. this is a three-year full-time salaried program provided by thirty centers across the uk  sponsored by the national health service (nhs). these clinical-psychology doctoral degrees are accredited by the british psychological society and the hcpc. entry into these programs is highly competitive and requires at least a three-year undergraduate degree in psychology  plus some form of experience  usually in either the nhs  as an assistant psychologist  or in academia  as a research assistant. more information about the path to training in the uk can be found at the central clearing house for clinical psychology training applications  and at www.clinpsy.org.uk  where questions can be answered on the forum run by qualified uk clinical psychologists.   ==== employment ==== as of december 2012  in the united kingdom  there are 19 000 practitioner psychologists registered across seven categories  clinical psychologist  counseling psychologist  educational psychologist  forensic psychologist  health psychologist  occupational psychologist  sport and exercise psychologist. at least 9 500 of these are clinical psychologists  which is the largest group of psychologists in clinical settings such as the nhs. around 2 000 are educational psychologists.   === united states and canada ===   ==== regulation ==== a professional in the u.s. or canada must hold a graduate degree in psychology (ma  psy.d.  ed.d.  or ph.d.)  or have a state license to use the title psychologist. the exception to this is the profession of school psychology  which most states certify or license separately or under different requirements than healthcare provider psychologists. the most commonly recognized psychology professionals are clinical and counseling psychologists  who provide psychotherapy  or administer and interpret psychological tests. requirements vary state-by-state for academics in psychology  as well as for
government employees. psychologists in the united states campaigned for legislative changes to enable specially trained psychologists to prescribe psychiatric medicine. legislation in idaho  iowa  louisiana  new mexico  and illinois has granted those who complete an additional master s degree program in psychopharmacology permission to prescribe medications for mental and emotional disorders. as of 2019  louisiana is the only state where the licensing and regulation of the practice of psychology by medical psychologists (mps) is regulated by a medical board (the louisiana state board of medical examiners) rather than a board of psychologists. while other states have pursued prescriptive privileges  they have not succeeded. similar legislation in the states of hawaii and oregon passed through their respective legislative bodies  but in each case the legislation was vetoed by the state s governor.in 1989  the u.s department of defense was directed to create the psychopharmacology demonstration project (pdp). by 1997  ten psychologists were trained in psychopharmacology and granted the ability to prescribe psychiatric medications.in the united states and canada  full membership in the american psychological association requires doctoral training (except in some canadian provinces  such as alberta  where a master s degree is sufficient). the minimal requirement for full membership can be waived in circumstances where there is evidence that significant contribution or performance in the field of psychology has been made. associate membership requires at least two years of postgraduate studies in psychology or an approved related discipline.   ==== schooling ====  there are a number of u.s. schools offering accredited programs in clinical psychology resulting in a master s degree. such programs can range from forty-eight to eighty-four units  most often taking two to three years to complete after the undergraduate degree. training usually emphasizes theory and treatment over research  quite often with a focus on school  or couples and family counseling. similar to doctoral programs  master s level students usually must fulfill time in a clinical practicum under supervision  some programs also require a minimum amount of personal psychotherapy. while many graduates from master s level training go on to doctoral psychology programs  a large number also go directly into practice—often as a licensed professional counselor (lpc)  marriage and family therapist (mft)  or other similar licensed practice.there is stiff competition to gain acceptance into clinical and counseling psychology doctoral programs (acceptance rates of 2-5% are not uncommon). clinical and counseling psychologists in the u.s. undergo many years of graduate training—usually five to seven years after the bachelor s degree—to gain demonstrable competence and experience. licensure as a psychologist takes an additional one to two years post ph.d./psy.d. (licensure requires 3 000 hours of supervised training)  depending on the state. today in america  about half of all clinical and counseling psychology graduate students are being trained in ph.d. programs that emphasize research and are conducted by universities—with the other half in psy.d. programs  which have more focus on practice (similar to professional degrees for medicine and law).
both types of doctoral programs (ph.d. and psy.d.) envision practicing clinical and counseling psychology in a research-based  scientifically valid manner  and most are accredited by the american psychological association.apa accreditation is very important for u.s. clinical  counseling  and school psychology programs because graduating from a non-accredited doctoral program may adversely affect employment prospects and present a hurdle for becoming licensed in some jurisdictions.doctorate (ph.d. and psy.d.) programs usually involve some variation on the following 5 to 7 year  90-120 unit curriculum   bases of behavior—biological  cognitive-affective and cultural-social individual differences—personality  lifespan development  psychopathology history and systems—development of psychological theories  practices and scientific knowledge clinical practice—diagnostics  psychological assessment  psychotherapeutic interventions  psychopharmacology  ethical and legal issues coursework in statistics and research design clinical experience practicum—usually three or four years of working with clients under supervision in a clinical setting. most practicum placements begin in either the first or second year of doctoral training doctoral internship—usually an intensive one or two-year placement in a clinical setting dissertation—ph.d. programs usually require original quantitative empirical research  while psy.d. dissertations involve original quantitative or qualitative research  theoretical scholarship  program evaluation or development  critical literature analysis or clinical application and analysis. the dissertation typically takes 2-3 years to complete. specialized electives—many programs offer sets of elective courses for specializations  such as health  child  family  community or neuropsychology personal psychotherapy—many programs require students to undertake a certain number of hours of personal psychotherapy (with a non-faculty therapist) although in recent years this requirement has become less frequent. comprehensive exams or master s thesis  a thesis can involve original data collection and is distinct from a dissertation   ==== licensure ==== the practice of clinical and counseling psychology requires a license in the united states and canada. although each of the u.s. states is different in terms of requirements and licenses (see and for examples)  there are three common requirements  graduation from an accredited school with the appropriate degree completion of supervised clinical experience passing a written examination and  in some states  an oral examinationall u.s. state  and canada provincial  licensing boards are members of the association of state and provincial psychology boards (asppb) which created and maintains the examination for professional practice in psychology (eppp). many states require other examinations in addition to the eppp  such as a jurisprudence (i.e. mental health law) examination or an oral examination. most states also require a certain number of continuing education credits per year in order to renew a license. licensees can obtain this through various means  such as taking audited classes and attending approved workshops. there are professions whose scope of practice overlaps with the practice of psychology (particularly with respect to providing psychotherapy) and for which a license is required.  psychologist. to practice with the title of  psychologist  in almost all cases a doctorate degree is required (a phd or psyd in the u.s.). normally 
after the degree  the practitioner must fulfill a certain number of supervised postdoctoral hours ranging from 1 500-3 000 (usually taking one to two years)  and passing the eppp and any other state or provincial exams. marriage and family therapist (mft). an mft license requires a doctorate or master s degree. in addition  it usually involves two years of post-degree clinical experience under supervision  and licensure requires passing a written exam  commonly the national examination for marriage and family therapists  which is maintained by the american association for marriage and family therapy. in addition  most states require an oral exam. mfts  as the title implies  work mostly with families and couples  addressing a wide range of common psychological problems. some jurisdictions have exemptions that let someone practice marriage and family therapy without meeting the requirements for a license. that is  they offer a license but do not require that marriage and family therapists obtain one. licensed professional counselor (lpc). similar to the mft  the lpc license requires a master s or doctorate degree  a minimum number of hours of supervised clinical experience in a pre-doc practicum  and the passing of the national counselor exam. similar licenses are the licensed mental health counselor (lmhc)  licensed clinical professional counselor (lcpc)  and clinical counselor in mental health (ccmh). in some states  after passing the exam  a temporary lpc license is awarded and the clinician may begin the normal 3000-hour supervised internship leading to the full license allowing to practice as a counselor or psychotherapist  usually under the supervision of a licensed psychologist. some jurisdictions have exemptions that allow counseling to practice without meeting the requirements for a license. that is  they offer a license but do not require that counselors obtain one. licensed psychological associate (lpa) twenty-six states offer a master s-only license  a common one being the lpa  which allows for the therapist to either practice independently  or  more commonly  under the supervision of a licensed psychologist  depending on the state. common requirements are two to four years of post-master s supervised clinical experience and passing a psychological associates examination. other titles for this level of licensing include psychological technician (alabama)  psychological assistant (california)  licensed clinical psychotherapist (kansas)  licensed psychological practitioner (minnesota)  licensed behavioral practitioner (oklahoma)  licensed psychological associate (north carolina) or psychological examiner (tennessee). licensed behavior analysts licensed behavior analysts are licensed in five states to provide services for clients with substance abuse  developmental disabilities  and mental illness. this profession draws on the evidence base of applied behavior analysis and the philosophy of behaviorism. behavior analysts have at least a master s degree in behavior analysis or in a mental health related discipline  as well as having taken at least five core courses in applied behavior analysis. many behavior analysts have a doctorate. most programs have a formalized internship program  and several programs are offered online. most practitioners
have passed the examination offered by the behavior analysis certification board.behavior analyst certification board the model licensing act for behavior analysts can be found at the association for behavior analysis international s website.   ==== employment ====  in the united states  of 170 200 jobs for psychologists  152 000 are employed in clinical  counseling  and school positions  2 300 are employed in industrial-organizational positions  and 15 900 are in  all other  positions. the median salary in the u.s.  in 2012  for clinical  counseling  and school psychologists was us$69 280 and the median salary for organizational psychologists was us$83 580.   == see also == list of psychologists mental health professional list of psychological topics list of psychologists on postage stamps   == notes ==   == references ==
psychotherapy (psychological therapy or talking therapy) is the use of psychological methods  particularly when based on regular personal interaction  to help a person change behavior and overcome problems in desired ways. psychotherapy aims to improve an individual s well-being and mental health  to resolve or mitigate troublesome behaviors  beliefs  compulsions  thoughts  or emotions  and to improve relationships and social skills. certain psychotherapies are considered evidence-based for treating some diagnosed mental disorders. others have been criticized as pseudoscience. there are over a thousand different psychotherapy techniques  some being minor variations  while others are based on very different conceptions of psychology  ethics (how to live)  or techniques. most involve one-to-one sessions  between the client and therapist  but some are conducted with groups  including families. psychotherapists may be mental health professionals such as psychiatrists  psychologists  mental health nurses  clinical social workers  marriage and family therapists  or professional counselors. psychotherapists may also come from a variety of other backgrounds  and depending on the jurisdiction may be legally regulated  voluntarily regulated or unregulated (and the term itself may be protected or not).   == definitions == the term psychotherapy is derived from ancient greek psyche (ψυχή meaning  breath  spirit  soul ) and therapeia (θεραπεία  healing  medical treatment ). the oxford english dictionary defines it now as  the treatment of disorders of the mind or personality by psychological methods...  however  in earlier use it denoted the treatment of disease through hypnotic suggestion.the american psychological association adopted a resolution on the effectiveness of psychotherapy in 2012 based on a definition developed by john c. norcross   psychotherapy is the informed and intentional application of clinical methods and interpersonal stances derived from established psychological principles for the purpose of assisting people to modify their behaviors  cognitions  emotions  and/or other personal characteristics in directions that the participants deem desirable . influential editions of a work by psychiatrist jerome frank defined psychotherapy as a healing relationship using socially authorized methods in a series of contacts primarily involving words  acts and rituals—regarded as forms of persuasion and rhetoric.some definitions of counseling overlap with psychotherapy (particularly in non-directive client-centered approaches)  or counseling may refer to guidance for everyday problems in specific areas  typically for shorter durations with a less medical or  professional  focus. somatotherapy refers to the use of physical changes as injuries and illnesses  and sociotherapy to the use of a person s social environment to effect therapeutic change. psychotherapy may address spirituality as a significant part of someone s mental / psychological life  and some forms are derived from spiritual philosophies  but practices based on treating the spiritual as a separate dimension are not necessarily considered as traditional or  legitimate  forms of psychotherapy.historically  psychotherapy has sometimes meant  interpretative  (i.e. freudian) methods  namely psychoanalysis  in contrast with other methods to treat psychiatric disorders
such as behavior modification.psychotherapy is often dubbed as a  talking therapy  particularly for a general audience  though not all forms of psychotherapy rely on verbal communication. children or adults who do not engage in verbal communication (or not in the usual way) are not excluded from psychotherapy  indeed some types are designed for such cases.   == delivery == psychotherapy may be delivered in person (one on one  or with couples  or in groups)  over the phone  via telephone counseling  or via the internet.it has not been established whether the effectiveness of psychotherapy administered online  over video chat for instance  is comparable to that delivered within in-person meetings  clear  consistent trends from empirical research are lacking regarding the efficacy of online therapy - australian counselling association.the victoria government s health agency has awarded no mental health app with scores greater than 3 stars out of 5 for effectiveness. one reason for this is that online cognitive behavioural therapy programs have poor  adherence  compared to face-to-face programs. that means that many users do not  stick to  the program as prescribed. they may uninstall the app or skip days  for instance.   === treatments duration === according to the american psychological association  experts suggests that those who have had two depressive episodes in recent years  or three episodes over their life  have to get treated on an ongoing basis to prevent recurrent depression  at least 60% of individuals who have had one depressive episode will have another  70% of individuals who have had two depressive episodes will have a third  and 90% of individuals with three episodes will have a fourth episode.   == regulation ==  psychotherapists traditionally may be  mental health professionals like psychologists and psychiatrists  professionals from other backgrounds (family therapists  social workers  nurses  etc.) who have trained in a specific psychotherapy  or (in some cases) academic or scientifically-trained professionals. psychiatrists are trained first as physicians  and—as such—they may prescribe prescription medication  and specialist psychiatric training begins after medical school in psychiatric residencies  however  their specialty is in mental disorders or forms of mental illness. clinical psychologists have specialist doctoral degrees in psychology with some clinical and research components. other clinical practitioners  social workers  mental health counselors  pastoral counselors  and nurses with a specialization in mental health  also often conduct psychotherapy. many of the wide variety of psychotherapy training programs and institutional settings are multi-professional. in most countries  psychotherapy training are all at a post-graduate level  often at a master s degree (or doctoral) level  over a 4-year period  with significant supervised practice and clinical placements. such professionals doing specialized psychotherapeutic work also require a program of continuing professional education after basic professional training. there is a 2013 listing of the extensive professional competencies of a european psychotherapist  developed by the european association of
psychotherapy (eap).as sensitive and deeply personal topics are often discussed during psychotherapy  therapists are expected  and usually legally bound  to respect client or patient confidentiality. the critical importance of client confidentiality—and the limited circumstances in which it may need to be broken for the protection of clients or others—is enshrined in the regulatory psychotherapeutic organizations  codes of ethical practice. examples of when it is typically accepted to break confidentiality include when the therapist has knowledge that a child or elder is being physically abused  when there is a direct  clear and imminent threat of serious physical harm to self or to a specific individual.   === europe === as of 2015  there are still a lot of variations between different european countries about the regulation and delivery of psychotherapy. several countries have no regulation of the practice or no protection of the title. some have a system of voluntary registration  with independent professional organizations  while other countries attempt to restrict the practice of psychotherapy to  mental health professionals  (psychologists and psychiatrists) with state-certified training. the titles that are protected also vary. the european association for psychotherapy (eap) established the 1990 strasbourg declaration on psychotherapy  which is dedicated to establishing an independent profession of psychotherapy in europe  with pan-european standards. the eap has already made significant contacts with the european union & european commission towards this end. given that the european union has a primary policy about the free movement of labor within europe  european legislation can overrule national regulations that are  in essence  forms of restrictive practices. in germany  the practice of psychotherapy for adults is restricted to qualified psychologists and physicians (including psychiatrists) who have completed several years of specialist practical training and certification in psychotherapy. as psychoanalysis  psychodynamic therapy  and cognitive behavioral therapy meet the requirements of german health insurance companies  mental health professionals regularly opt for one of these three specializations in their postgraduate training. for psychologists  this includes three years of full-time practical training (4.200 hours)  encompassing a year-long internship at an accredited psychiatric institution  six months of clinical work at an outpatient facility  600 hours of supervised psychotherapy in an outpatient setting  and at least 600 hours of theoretical seminars. social workers may complete the specialist training for child and teenage clients. similarly in italy  the practice of psychotherapy is restricted to graduates in psychology or medicine who have completed four years of recognised specialist training. sweden has a similar restriction on the title  psychotherapist  which may only be used by professionals who have gone through a post-graduate training in psychotherapy and then applied for a licence  issued by the national board of health and welfare.legislation in france restricts the use of the title  psychotherapist  to professionals on the national register of psychotherapists  which requires a training in clinical psychopathology and a period of internship which is only open to physicians or titulars of
a master s degree in psychology or psychoanalysis.austria and switzerland (2011) have laws that recognize multi-disciplinary functional approaches.in the united kingdom  the government and health and care professions council considered mandatory legal registration but decided that it was best left to professional bodies to regulate themselves  so the professional standards authority for health and social care (psa) launched an accredited voluntary registers scheme.  counseling and psychotherapy are not protected titles in the united kingdom.  counsellors and psychotherapists who have trained and qualify to a certain standard (usually a level 4 diploma) can apply to be members of the professional bodies who are listed on the psa accredited registers.   === united states === in some states  counselors or therapists must be licensed to use certain words and titles on self-identification or advertising. in some other states  the restrictions on practice are more closely associated with the charging of fees. licensing and regulation are performed by various states. presentation of practice as licensed  but without such a license  is generally illegal. without a license  for example  a practitioner cannot bill insurance companies. information about state licensure is provided by the american psychological association.in addition to state laws  the american psychological association requires its members to adhere to its published ethical principles of psychologists and code of conduct. the american board of professional psychology examines and certifies  psychologists who demonstrate competence in approved specialty areas in professional psychology .   == history ==  psychotherapy can be said to have been practiced through the ages  as medics  philosophers  spiritual practitioners and people in general used psychological methods to heal others.in the western tradition  by the 19th century  a moral treatment movement (then meaning morale or mental) developed based on non-invasive non-restraint therapeutic methods. another influential movement was started by franz mesmer (1734–1815) and his student armand-marie-jacques de chastenet  marquis of puységur (1751–1825). called mesmerism or animal magnetism  it would have a strong influence on the rise of dynamic psychology and psychiatry as well as theories about hypnosis. in 1853 walter cooper dendy introduced the term  psycho-therapeia  regarding how physicians might influence the mental states of sufferers and thus their bodily ailments  for example by creating opposing emotions to promote mental balance. daniel hack tuke cited the term and wrote about  psycho-therapeutics  in 1872  in which he also proposed making a science of animal magnetism. hippolyte bernheim and colleagues in the  nancy school  developed the concept of  psychotherapy  in the sense of using the mind to heal the body through hypnotism  yet further. charles lloyd tuckey s 1889 work  psycho-therapeutics  or treatment by hypnotism and suggestion popularized the work of the nancy school in english. also in 1889 a clinic used the word in its title for the first time  when frederik van eeden and albert willem in amsterdam renamed theirs  clinique de psycho-thérapeutique suggestive  after visiting nancy.
during this time  travelling stage hypnosis became popular  and such activities added to the scientific controversies around the use of hypnosis in medicine. also in 1892  at the second congress of experimental psychology  van eeden attempted to take the credit for the term psychotherapy and to distance the term from hypnosis. in 1896  the german journal zeitschrift für hypnotismus  suggestionstherapie  suggestionslehre und verwandte psychologische forschungen changed its name to zeitschrift für hypnotismus  psychotherapie sowie andere psychophysiologische und psychopathologische forschungen  which is probably the first journal to use the term. thus psychotherapy initially meant  the treatment of disease by psychic or hypnotic influence  or by suggestion .  sigmund freud visited the nancy school and his early neurological practice involved the use of hypnotism. however following the work of his mentor josef breuer—in particular a case where symptoms appeared partially resolved by what the patient  bertha pappenheim  dubbed a  talking cure —freud began focusing on conditions that appeared to have psychological causes originating in childhood experiences and the unconscious mind. he went on to develop techniques such as free association  dream interpretation  transference and analysis of the id  ego and superego. his popular reputation as the father of psychotherapy was established by his use of the distinct term  psychoanalysis  tied to an overarching system of theories and methods  and by the effective work of his followers in rewriting history. many theorists  including alfred adler  carl jung  karen horney  anna freud  otto rank  erik erikson  melanie klein and heinz kohut  built upon freud s fundamental ideas and often developed their own systems of psychotherapy. these were all later categorized as psychodynamic  meaning anything that involved the psyche s conscious/unconscious influence on external relationships and the self. sessions tended to number into the hundreds over several years. behaviorism developed in the 1920s  and behavior modification as a therapy became popularized in the 1950s and 1960s. notable contributors were joseph wolpe in south africa  m.b. shipiro and hans eysenck in britain  and john b. watson and b.f. skinner in the united states. behavioral therapy approaches relied on principles of operant conditioning  classical conditioning and social learning theory to bring about therapeutic change in observable symptoms. the approach became commonly used for phobias  as well as other disorders. some therapeutic approaches developed out of the european school of existential philosophy. concerned mainly with the individual s ability to develop and preserve a sense of meaning and purpose throughout life  major contributors to the field (e.g.  irvin yalom  rollo may) and europe (viktor frankl  ludwig binswanger  medard boss  r.d.laing  emmy van deurzen) attempted to create therapies sensitive to common  life crises  springing from the essential bleakness of human self-awareness  previously accessible only through the complex writings of existential philosophers (e.g.  søren kierkegaard  jean-paul sartre  gabriel marcel  martin heidegger  friedrich
nietzsche). the uniqueness of the patient-therapist relationship thus also forms a vehicle for therapeutic inquiry. a related body of thought in psychotherapy started in the 1950s with carl rogers. based also on the works of abraham maslow and his hierarchy of human needs  rogers brought person-centered psychotherapy into mainstream focus. the primary requirement was that the client be in receipt of three core  conditions  from his counselor or therapist  unconditional positive regard  sometimes described as  prizing  the client s humanity  congruence [authenticity/genuineness/transparency]  and empathic understanding. this type of interaction was thought to enable clients to fully experience and express themselves  and thus develop according to their innate potential. others developed the approach  like fritz and laura perls in the creation of gestalt therapy  as well as marshall rosenberg  founder of nonviolent communication  and eric berne  founder of transactional analysis. later these fields of psychotherapy would become what is known as humanistic psychotherapy today. self-help groups and books became widespread. during the 1950s  albert ellis originated rational emotive behavior therapy (rebt). independently a few years later  psychiatrist aaron t. beck developed a form of psychotherapy known as cognitive therapy. both of these included relatively short  structured and present-focused techniques aimed at identifying and changing a person s beliefs  appraisals and reaction-patterns  by contrast with the more long-lasting insight-based approach of psychodynamic or humanistic therapies. beck s approach used primarily the socratic method  and links have been drawn between ancient stoic philosophy and these cognitive therapies.cognitive and behavioral therapy approaches were increasingly combined and grouped under the umbrella term cognitive behavioral therapy (cbt) in the 1970s. many approaches within cbt are oriented towards active/directive yet collaborative empiricism (a form of reality-testing)  and assessing and modifying core beliefs and dysfunctional schemas. these approaches gained widespread acceptance as a primary treatment for numerous disorders. a  third wave  of cognitive and behavioral therapies developed  including acceptance and commitment therapy and dialectical behavior therapy  which expanded the concepts to other disorders and/or added novel components and mindfulness exercises. however the  third wave  concept has been criticized as not essentially different from other therapies and having roots in earlier ones as well. counseling methods developed include solution-focused therapy and systemic coaching. postmodern psychotherapies such as narrative therapy and coherence therapy do not impose definitions of mental health and illness  but rather see the goal of therapy as something constructed by the client and therapist in a social context. systemic therapy also developed  which focuses on family and group dynamics—and transpersonal psychology  which focuses on the spiritual facet of human experience. other orientations developed in the last three decades include feminist therapy  brief therapy  somatic psychology  expressive therapy  applied positive psychology and the human givens approach. a survey of over 2 500 us therapists in 2006 revealed the most utilized models of therapy and the ten most influential therapists of the previous quarter-century.  
== types ==   === overview === there are hundreds of psychotherapy approaches or schools of thought. by 1980 there were more than 250  by 1996 more than 450  and at the start of the 21st century there were over a thousand different named psychotherapies—some being minor variations while others are based on very different conceptions of psychology  ethics (how to live) or technique. in practice therapy is often not of one pure type but draws from a number of perspectives and schools—known as an integrative or eclectic approach. the importance of the therapeutic relationship  also known as therapeutic alliance  between client and therapist is often regarded as crucial to psychotherapy. common factors theory addresses this and other core aspects thought to be responsible for effective psychotherapy. sigmund freud (1856–1939)  a viennese neurologist who studied with jean-martin charcot in 1885  is often considered the father of modern psychotherapy. his methods included analyzing dreams for important insights that layout of awareness of the dreamer. other major elements of his methods  which changed throughout the years  included identification of childhood sexuality  the role of anxiety as a manifestation of inner conflict  the differentiation of parts of the psyche (id  ego  superego)  transference and countertransference (the patient s projections onto the therapist  and the therapist s emotional responses to that). some of his concepts were too broad to be amenable to empirical testing and invalidation  and he was critiqued for this by jaspers. numerous major figures elaborated and refined freud s therapeutic techniques including melanie klein  donald winnicott  and others. since the 1960s  however  the use of freudian-based analysis for the treatment of mental disorders has declined substantially. different types of psychotherapy have been created along with the advent of clinical trials to test them scientifically. these incorporate subjective treatments (after beck)  behavioral treatments (after skinner and wolpe) and additional time-constrained and centered structures  for example  interpersonal psychotherapy. in youth issue and in schizophrenia  the systems of family treatment hold esteem. a portion of the thoughts emerging from therapy are presently pervasive and some are a piece of the tool set of ordinary clinical practice. they are not just medications  they additionally help to understand complex conduct. therapy may address specific forms of diagnosable mental illness  or everyday problems in managing or maintaining interpersonal relationships or meeting personal goals. a course of therapy may happen before  during or after pharmacotherapy (e.g. taking psychiatric medication). psychotherapies are categorized in several different ways. a distinction can be made between those based on a medical model and those based on a humanistic model. in the medical model  the client is seen as unwell and the therapist employs their skill to help the client back to health. the extensive use of the dsm-iv  the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders in the united states is an example of a medically exclusive model. the humanistic or non-medical model in
contrast strives to depathologise the human condition. the therapist attempts to create a relational environment conducive to experiential learning and help build the client s confidence in their own natural process resulting in a deeper understanding of themselves. the therapist may see themselves as a facilitator/helper. another distinction is between individual one-to-one therapy sessions  and group psychotherapy  including couples therapy and family therapy. therapies are sometimes classified according to their duration  a small number of sessions over a few weeks or months may be classified as brief therapy (or short-term therapy)  others  where regular sessions take place for years  may be classified as long-term. some practitioners distinguish between more  uncovering  (or  depth ) approaches and more  supportive  psychotherapy. uncovering psychotherapy emphasizes facilitating the client s insight into the roots of their difficulties. the best-known example is classical psychoanalysis. supportive psychotherapy by contrast stresses strengthening the client s coping mechanisms and often providing encouragement and advice  as well as reality-testing and limit-setting where necessary. depending on the client s issues and situation  a more supportive or more uncovering approach may be optimal.most forms of psychotherapy use spoken conversation. some also use various other forms of communication such as the written word  artwork  drama  narrative story or music. psychotherapy with children and their parents often involves play  dramatization (i.e. role-play)  and drawing  with a co-constructed narrative from these non-verbal and displaced modes of interacting.there are also different formats for delivering some therapies  as well as the usual face to face  for example via telephone or via online interaction. there have also been developments in computer-assisted therapy  such as virtual reality therapy for behavioral exposure  multimedia programs to each cognitive techniques  and handheld devices for improved monitoring or putting ideas into practice.   === humanistic ===  these psychotherapies  also known as  experiential  are based on humanistic psychology and emerged in reaction to both behaviorism and psychoanalysis  being dubbed the  third force . they are primarily concerned with the human development and needs of the individual  with an emphasis on subjective meaning  a rejection of determinism  and a concern for positive growth rather than pathology. some posit an inherent human capacity to maximize potential   the self-actualizing tendency  the task of therapy is to create a relational environment where this tendency might flourish. humanistic psychology can  in turn  be rooted in existentialism—the belief that human beings can only find meaning by creating it. this is the goal of existential therapy. existential therapy is in turn philosophically associated with phenomenology.person-centered therapy  also known as client-centered  focuses on the therapist showing openness  empathy and  unconditional positive regard  to help clients express and develop their own self.gestalt therapy  originally called  concentration therapy  is an existential/experiential form that facilitates awareness in the various contexts of life  by moving from talking about relatively remote
situations to action and direct current experience. derived from various influences  including an overhaul of psychoanalysis  it stands on top of essentially four load-bearing theoretical walls  phenomenological method  dialogical relationship  field-theoretical strategies  and experimental freedom.a briefer form of humanistic therapy is the human givens approach  introduced in 1998/9. it is a solution-focused intervention based on identifying emotional needs—such as for security  autonomy and social connection—and using various educational and psychological methods to help people meet those needs more fully or appropriately.   === insight-oriented ===  insight-oriented psychotherapies focus on revealing or interpreting unconscious processes. most commonly referring to psychodynamic therapy  of which psychoanalysis is the oldest and most intensive form  these applications of depth psychology encourage the verbalization of all the patient s thoughts  including free associations  fantasies  and dreams  from which the analyst formulates the nature of the past and present unconscious conflicts which are causing the patient s symptoms and character problems. there are six main schools of psychoanalysis  which all influenced psychodynamic theory  freudian  ego psychology  object relations theory  self psychology  interpersonal psychoanalysis  and relational psychoanalysis. techniques for analytic group therapy have also developed.   === cognitive-behavioral ===  behavior therapies use behavioral techniques  including applied behavior analysis (also known as behavior modification)  to change maladaptive patterns of behavior to improve emotional responses  cognitions  and interactions with others. functional analytic psychotherapy is one form of this approach. by nature  behavioral therapies are empirical (data-driven)  contextual (focused on the environment and context)  functional (interested in the effect or consequence a behavior ultimately has)  probabilistic (viewing behavior as statistically predictable)  monistic (rejecting mind-body dualism and treating the person as a unit)  and relational (analyzing bidirectional interactions).cognitive therapy focuses directly on changing the thoughts  in order to improve the emotions and behaviors. cognitive behavioral therapy attempts to combine the above two approaches  focused on the construction and reconstruction of people s cognitions  emotions and behaviors. generally in cbt  the therapist  through a wide array of modalities  helps clients assess  recognize and deal with problematic and dysfunctional ways of thinking  emoting and behaving. the concept of  third wave  psychotherapies reflects an influence of eastern philosophy in clinical psychology  incorporating principles such as meditation into interventions such as mindfulness-based cognitive therapy  acceptance and commitment therapy  and dialectical behavior therapy for borderline personality disorder.interpersonal psychotherapy (ipt) is a relatively brief form of psychotherapy (deriving from both cbt and psychodynamic approaches) that has been increasingly studied and endorsed by guidelines for some conditions. it focuses on the links between mood and social circumstances  helping to build social skills and social support. it aims to foster adaptation to current interpersonal roles and situations. other types include reality therapy/choice theory  multimodal therapy  and therapies for specific disorders including ptsd therapies such as cognitive processing therapy and emdr 
substance abuse therapies such as relapse prevention and contingency management  ocd therapies such as exposure and response prevention  and co-occurring disorders therapies such as seeking safety.   === systemic ===  systemic therapy seeks to address people not just individually  as is often the focus of other forms of therapy  but in relationship  dealing with the interactions of groups  their patterns and dynamics (includes family therapy and marriage counseling). community psychology is a type of systemic psychology. the term group therapy was first used around 1920 by jacob l. moreno  whose main contribution was the development of psychodrama  in which groups were used as both cast and audience for the exploration of individual problems by reenactment under the direction of the leader. the more analytic and exploratory use of groups in both hospital and out-patient settings was pioneered by a few european psychoanalysts who emigrated to the us  such as paul schilder  who treated severely neurotic and mildly psychotic out-patients in small groups at bellevue hospital  new york. the power of groups was most influentially demonstrated in britain during the second world war  when several psychoanalysts and psychiatrists proved the value of group methods for officer selection in the war office selection boards. a chance to run an army psychiatric unit on group lines was then given to several of these pioneers  notably wilfred bion and rickman  followed by s. h. foulkes  main  and bridger. the northfield hospital in birmingham gave its name to what came to be called the two  northfield experiments  which provided the impetus for the development since the war of both social therapy  that is  the therapeutic community movement  and the use of small groups for the treatment of neurotic and personality disorders. today group therapy is used in clinical settings and in private practice settings.   === expressive ===  expressive therapy is any form of therapy that utilizes artistic expression as its core means of treating clients. expressive therapists use the different disciplines of the creative arts as therapeutic interventions. this includes the modalities dance therapy  drama therapy  art therapy  music therapy  writing therapy  among others. expressive therapists believe that often the most effective way of treating a client is through the expression of imagination in creative work and integrating and processing what issues are raised in the act.   === postmodernist === also known as post-structuralist or constructivist. narrative therapy gives attention to each person s  dominant story  by means of therapeutic conversations  which also may involve exploring unhelpful ideas and how they came to prominence. possible social and cultural influences may be explored if the client deems it helpful. coherence therapy posits multiple levels of mental constructs that create symptoms as a way to strive for self-protection or self-realization. feminist therapy does not accept that there is one single or correct way of looking at reality and therefore is considered a postmodernist
approach.   === other === transpersonal psychology addresses the client in the context of a spiritual understanding of consciousness. positive psychotherapy (ppt) (since 1968) is a method in the field of humanistic and psychodynamic psychotherapy and is based on a positive image of humans  with a health-promoting  resource-oriented and conflict-centered approach. hypnotherapy is undertaken while a subject is in a state of hypnosis. hypnotherapy is often applied in order to modify a subject s behavior  emotional content  and attitudes  as well as a wide range of conditions including  dysfunctional habits  anxiety  stress-related illness  pain management  and personal development.body psychotherapy  part of the field of somatic psychology  focuses on the link between the mind and the body and tries to access deeper levels of the psyche through greater awareness of the physical body and emotions. there are various body-oriented approaches  such as reichian (wilhelm reich) character-analytic vegetotherapy and orgonomy  neo-reichian bioenergetic analysis  somatic experiencing  integrative body psychotherapy  ron kurtz s hakomi psychotherapy  sensorimotor psychotherapy  biosynthesis psychotherapy  and biodynamic psychotherapy. these approaches are not to be confused with body work or body-therapies that seek to improve primarily physical health through direct work (touch and manipulation) on the body  rather than through directly psychological methods. some non-western indigenous therapies have been developed. in african countries this includes harmony restoration therapy  meseron therapy and systemic therapies based on the ubuntu philosophy.integrative psychotherapy is an attempt to combine ideas and strategies from more than one theoretical approach. these approaches include mixing core beliefs and combining proven techniques. forms of integrative psychotherapy include multimodal therapy  the transtheoretical model  cyclical psychodynamics  systematic treatment selection  cognitive analytic therapy  internal family systems model  multitheoretical psychotherapy and conceptual interaction. in practice  most experienced psychotherapists develop their own integrative approach over time.   === child ===  counseling and psychotherapy must be adapted to meet the developmental needs of children. it is generally held to be one part of an effective strategy for some purposes and not for others.  in addition to therapy for the child  or even instead of it  children may benefit if their parents speak to a therapist  take parenting classes  attend grief counseling  or take other actions to resolve stressful situations that affect the child. parent management training is a highly effective form of psychotherapy that teaches parents skills to reduce their child s behavior problems. many counseling preparation programs include courses in human development. since children often do not have the ability to articulate thoughts and feelings  counselors will use a variety of media such as crayons  paint  clay  puppets  bibliocounseling (books)  toys  board games  et cetera. the use of play therapy is often rooted in psychodynamic theory  but other approaches such as solution focused brief counseling may also employ the use of play in counseling. in many cases the counselor may
prefer to work with the care taker of the child  especially if the child is younger than age four. yet  by doing so  the counselor risks the perpetuation of maladaptive interactive patterns and the adverse effects on development that have already been affected on the child s end of the relationship. therefore  contemporary thinking on working with this young age group has leaned towards working with parent and child simultaneously within the interaction  as well as individually as needed.   === computer-supported psychotherapy ===  research on computer-supported and computer-based interventions has increased significantly over the course of the last two decades. the following applications frequently have been investigated   tele-therapy / tele-mental health  in teletherapy classical psychotherapy is provided via modern communication devices  such as via videoconferencing. virtual reality  vr is a computer-generated scenario that simulates experience. the immersive environment  used for simulated exposure  can be similar to the real world or it can be fantastical  creating a new experience. computer-based interventions (or online interventions or internet interventions)  these interventions can be described as interactive self-help. they usually entail a combination of text  audio or video elements. computer-supported therapy (or blended therapy)  classical psychotherapy is supported by means of online or software application elements. the feasibility of such interventions has been investigated for individual and group therapy.   == effects ==   === evaluation === there is considerable controversy about whether  or when  psychotherapy efficacy is best evaluated by randomized controlled trials or more individualized idiographic methods.one issue with trials is what to use as a placebo treatment group or non-treatment control group. often  this group includes patients on a waiting list  or those receiving some kind of regular non-specific contact or support. researchers must consider how best to match the use of inert tablets or sham treatments in placebo-controlled studies in pharmaceutical trials. several interpretations and differing assumptions and language remain. another issue is the attempt to standardize and manualize therapies and link them to specific symptoms of diagnostic categories  making them more amenable to research. some report that this may reduce efficacy or gloss over individual needs. fonagy and roth s opinion is that the benefits of the evidence-based approach outweighs the difficulties.there are several formal frameworks for evaluating whether a psychotherapist is a good fit for a patient. one example is the scarsdale psychotherapy self-evaluation (spse). however  some scales  such as the sps  elicit information specific to certain schools of psychotherapy alone (e.g. the superego). many psychotherapists believe that the nuances of psychotherapy cannot be captured by questionnaire-style observation  and prefer to rely on their own clinical experiences and conceptual arguments to support the type of treatment they practice. psychodynamic therapists in particular believe that evidence-based approaches are not appropriate to their methods or assumptions  though some have increasingly accepted the challenge to implement evidence-based approaches in their methods.   === outcomes in relation with selected kinds of treatment
=== large-scale international reviews of scientific studies have concluded that psychotherapy is effective for numerous conditions.one line of research consistently finds that supposedly different forms of psychotherapy show similar effectiveness. according to the handbook of counseling psychology   meta-analyses of psychotherapy studies have consistently demonstrated that there are no substantial differences in outcomes among treatments . the handbook states that there is  little evidence to suggest that any one psychological therapy consistently outperforms any other for any specific psychological disorders. this is sometimes called the dodo bird verdict after a scene/section in alice in wonderland where every competitor in a race was called a winner and is given prizes .further analyses seek to identify the factors that the psychotherapies have in common that seem to account for this  known as common factors theory  for example the quality of the therapeutic relationship  interpretation of problem  and the confrontation of painful emotions.outcome studies have been critiqued for being too removed from real-world practice in that they use carefully selected therapists who have been extensively trained and monitored  and patients who may be non-representative of typical patients by virtue of strict inclusionary/exclusionary criteria. such concerns impact the replication of research results and the ability to generalize from them to practicing therapists.however  specific therapies have been tested for use with specific disorders  and regulatory organizations in both the uk and us make recommendations for different conditions.the helsinki psychotherapy study was one of several large long-term clinical trials of psychotherapies that have taken place. anxious and depressed patients in two short-term therapies (solution-focused and brief psychodynamic) improved faster  but five years long-term psychotherapy and psychoanalysis gave greater benefits. several patient and therapist factors appear to predict suitability for different psychotherapies.meta-analyses have established that cognitive behavioural therapy (cbt) and psychodynamic psychotherapy are equally effective in treating depression.a 2014 meta analysis over 11 000 patients reveals that interpersonal psychotherapy (ipt) is of comparable effectiveness to cbt for depression but is inferior to the latter for eating disorders. for children and adolescents  interpersonal psychotherapy and cbt are the best methods according to a 2014 meta analysis of almost 4000 patients.   === mechanisms of change === it is not yet understood how psychotherapies can succeed in treating mental illnesses. different therapeutic approaches may be associated with particular theories about what needs to change in a person for a successful therapeutic outcome. in general  processes of emotional arousal and memory have long been held to play an important role. one theory combining these aspects proposes that permanent change occurs to the extent that the neuropsychological mechanism of memory reconsolidation is triggered and is able to incorporate new emotional experiences.   === adherence === patient adherence to a course of psychotherapy—continuing to attend sessions or complete tasks—is a major issue. the dropout level—early termination—ranges from around 30% to 60%  depending partly on how it is defined. the range is lower for research settings for various reasons  such as the selection of clients and how they are
inducted. early termination is associated on average with various demographic and clinical characteristics of clients  therapists and treatment interactions. the high level of dropout has raised some criticism about the relevance and efficacy of psychotherapy.most psychologists use between-session tasks in their general therapy work  and cognitive behavioral therapies in particular use and see them as an  active ingredient . it is not clear how often clients do not complete them  but it is thought to be a pervasive phenomenon.from the other side  the adherence of therapists to therapy protocols and techniques—known as  treatment integrity  or  fidelity —has also been studied  with complex mixed results. in general   however  it is a hallmark of evidence-based psychotherapy to use fidelity monitoring as part of therapy outcome trials and ongoing quality assurance in clinical implementation.   === adverse effects === research on adverse effects of psychotherapy has been limited for various reasons  yet they may be expected to occur in 5% to 20% of patients. problems include deterioration of symptoms or developing new symptoms  strains in other relationships  and therapy dependence. some techniques or therapists may carry more risks than others  and some client characteristics may make them more vulnerable. side-effects from properly conducted therapy should be distinguished from harms caused by malpractice.   === general critiques === some critics are skeptical of the healing power of psychotherapeutic relationships. some dismiss psychotherapy altogether in the sense of a scientific discipline requiring professional practitioners  instead favoring either nonprofessional help or biomedical treatments. others have pointed out ways in which the values and techniques of therapists can be harmful as well as helpful to clients (or indirectly to other people in a client s life).many resources available to a person experiencing emotional distress—the friendly support of friends  peers  family members  clergy contacts  personal reading  healthy exercise  research  and independent coping—all present considerable value. critics note that humans have been dealing with crises  navigating severe social problems and finding solutions to life problems long before the advent of psychotherapy.on the other hand  some argue psychotherapy is under-utilized and under-researched by contemporary psychiatry despite offering more promise than stagnant medication development. in 2015  the us national institute of mental health allocated only 5.4% of its budget to new clinical trials of psychotherapies (medication trials are largely funded by pharmaceutical companies)  despite plentiful evidence they can work and that patients are more likely to prefer them.some christians  such as theologian thomas c. oden  have argued that successful therapeutic relationships  based on true acceptance of the client as a human being without contingency  require a theological assumption  an ontological acceptance of god.further critiques have emerged from feminist  constructionist and discourse-analytical sources. key to these is the issue of power. in this regard there is a concern that clients are persuaded—both inside and outside the consulting room—to understand themselves and their difficulties in ways that are consistent
with therapeutic ideas. this means that alternative ideas (e.g.  feminist  economic  spiritual) are sometimes implicitly undermined. critics suggest that we idealize the situation when we think of therapy only as a helping relationship—arguing instead that it is fundamentally a political practice  in that some cultural ideas and practices are supported while others are undermined or disqualified  and that while it is seldom intended  the therapist–client relationship always participates in society s power relations and political dynamics. a noted academic who espoused this criticism was michel foucault. for these reasons it also needs to reflect the role of cultural beliefs and expectations in the treatment process.   == see also == improving access to psychological therapies list of psychotherapy journals physical therapy   == references ==   == further reading == when you don t know where to turn  a self-diagnosing guide to counseling and therapy. 1987. bartlett  s. isbn 9780809248292 introduction to the psychotherapies. 4th edition  2006. bloch  s. (editor). isbn 0198520921. theory and practice of counseling and psychotherapy. 10th edition  2015. corey  g. isbn 9781305263727. the neuroscience of psychotherapy  healing the social brain. 3rd edition  2017. cozolino  l. isbn 9780393712643. the complete adult psychotherapy treatment planner. 5th edition  2014. jongsma  peterson & bruce. isbn 111806786x. systems of psychotherapy  a transtheoretical analysis. 9th edition  2018. prochaska & norcross. isbn 9780190880415 psychotherapy  an introduction for psychiatry residents and other mental health trainees. 2005. slavney  p. isbn 0801880963. the basics of psychotherapy  an introduction to theory and practice. 2nd edition  2019. wampold  b. isbn 9781433830198.
psychoanalysis is a set of theories and therapeutic techniques related to the study of the unconscious mind  which together form a method of treatment for mental-health disorders. the discipline was established in the early 1890s by austrian neurologist sigmund freud and stemmed partly from the clinical work of josef breuer and others. psychoanalysis was later developed in different directions  mostly by students of freud such as alfred adler and carl gustav jung  and by neo-freudians such as erich fromm  karen horney and harry stack sullivan. freud retained the term psychoanalysis for his own school of thought.psychoanalysis is a controversial discipline and its validity as a science is contested. nonetheless  it remains a strong influence within psychiatry  more so in some quarters than others. the proportion of practitioners of freudian psychoanalysis has declined as evidence-based medicine has increased the use of cognitive behavioral therapy. psychoanalytic concepts are also widely used outside the therapeutic arena  in areas such as psychoanalytic literary criticism  as well as in the analysis of film  fairy tales and other cultural phenomena.   == basic tenets == the basic tenets of psychoanalysis include   a person s development is determined by often forgotten events in early childhood  rather than by inherited traits alone  human behaviour and cognition are largely determined by instinctual drives that are rooted in the unconscious  attempts to bring those drives into awareness triggers resistance in the form of defense mechanisms  particularly repression  conflicts between conscious and unconscious material can result in mental disturbances such as neurosis  neurotic traits  anxiety and depression  unconscious material can be found in dreams and unintentional acts  including mannerisms and slips of the tongue  liberation from the effects of the unconscious is achieved by bringing this material into the conscious mind through therapeutic intervention  the  centerpiece of the psychoanalytic process  is the transference  whereby patients relive their infantile conflicts by projecting onto the analyst feelings of love  dependence and anger.   == practice == during psychoanalytic sessions  which typically last 50 minutes and ideally take place 4–5 times a week  the patient (the  analysand ) may lie on a couch  with the analyst often sitting just behind and out of sight. the patient expresses his or her thoughts  including free associations  fantasies and dreams  from which the analyst infers the unconscious conflicts causing the patient s symptoms and character problems. through the analysis of these conflicts  which includes interpreting the transference and countertransference (the analyst s feelings for the patient)  the analyst confronts the patient s pathological defenses to help the patient gain insight.   == history == freud first used the term psychoanalysis (in french) in 1896. die traumdeutung (the interpretation of dreams)  which freud saw as his  most significant work  appeared in november 1899. psychoanalysis was later developed in different directions  mostly by students of freud such as alfred
adler and carl gustav jung  and by neo-freudians such as erich fromm  karen horney and harry stack sullivan. freud retained the term psychoanalysis for his own school of thought.   === 1890s === the idea of psychoanalysis (german  psychoanalyse) first started to receive serious attention under sigmund freud  who formulated his own theory of psychoanalysis in vienna in the 1890s. freud was a neurologist trying to find an effective treatment for patients with neurotic or hysterical symptoms. freud realised that there were mental processes that were not conscious  whilst he was employed as a neurological consultant at the children s hospital  where he noticed that many aphasic children had no apparent organic cause for their symptoms. he then wrote a monograph about this subject. in 1885  freud obtained a grant to study with jean-martin charcot  a famed neurologist  at the salpêtrière in paris  where freud followed the clinical presentations of charcot  particularly in the areas of hysteria  paralyses and the anaesthesias. charcot had introduced hypnotism as an experimental research tool and developed the photographic representation of clinical symptoms. freud s first theory to explain hysterical symptoms was presented in studies on hysteria (1895)  co-authored with his mentor the distinguished physician josef breuer  which was generally seen as the birth of psychoanalysis. the work was based on breuer s treatment of bertha pappenheim  referred to in case studies by the pseudonym  anna o.  treatment which pappenheim herself had dubbed the  talking cure . breuer wrote that many factors that could result in such symptoms  including various types of emotional trauma  and he also credited work by others such as pierre janet  while freud contended that at the root of hysterical symptoms were repressed memories of distressing occurrences  almost always having direct or indirect sexual associations.around the same time freud attempted to develop a neuro-physiological theory of unconscious mental mechanisms  which he soon gave up. it remained unpublished in his lifetime.the first occurrence of the term  psychoanalysis  (written psychoanalyse) was in freud s essay  l hérédité et l’étiologie des névroses  which was written and published in french in 1896.in 1896 freud also published his so-called seduction theory which proposed that the preconditions for hysterical symptoms are sexual excitations in infancy  and he claimed to have uncovered repressed memories of incidents of sexual abuse for all his current patients. however  by 1898 he had privately acknowledged to his friend and colleague wilhelm fliess that he no longer believed in his theory  though he did not state this publicly until 1906. though in 1896 he had reported that his patients  had no feeling of remembering the [infantile sexual] scenes  and assured him  emphatically of their unbelief  in later accounts he claimed that they had told him that they had been sexually abused in infancy. this became the received historical account until challenged by several freud scholars in the latter part of
the 20th century who argued that he had imposed his preconceived notions on his patients. however  building on his claims that the patients reported infantile sexual abuse experiences  freud subsequently contended that his clinical findings in the mid-1890s provided evidence of the occurrence of unconscious fantasies  supposedly to cover up memories of infantile masturbation. only much later did he claim the same findings as evidence for oedipal desires.by 1899  freud had theorised that dreams had symbolic significance  and generally were specific to the dreamer. freud formulated his second psychological theory— which hypothesises that the unconscious has or is a  primary process  consisting of symbolic and condensed thoughts  and a  secondary process  of logical  conscious thoughts. this theory was published in his 1899 book  the interpretation of dreams. chapter vii was a re-working of the earlier  project  and freud outlined his  topographic theory . in this theory  which was mostly later supplanted by the structural theory  unacceptable sexual wishes were repressed into the  system unconscious  unconscious due to society s condemnation of premarital sexual activity  and this repression created anxiety. this  topographic theory  is still popular in much of europe  although it has fallen out of favour in much of north america.   === 1900–1940s === in 1905  freud published three essays on the theory of sexuality in which he laid out his discovery of so-called psychosexual phases  oral (ages 0–2)  anal (2–4)  phallic-oedipal (today called 1st genital) (3–6)  latency (6-puberty)  and mature genital (puberty-onward). his early formulation included the idea that because of societal restrictions  sexual wishes were repressed into an unconscious state  and that the energy of these unconscious wishes could be turned into anxiety or physical symptoms. therefore  the early treatment techniques  including hypnotism and abreaction  were designed to make the unconscious conscious in order to relieve the pressure and the apparently resulting symptoms. this method would later on be left aside by freud  giving free association a bigger role. in on narcissism (1915) freud turned his attention to the subject of narcissism. still using an energic system  freud characterized the difference between energy directed at the self versus energy directed at others  called cathexis. by 1917  in  mourning and melancholia  he suggested that certain depressions were caused by turning guilt-ridden anger on the self.  in 1919 in  a child is being beaten  he began to address the problems of self-destructive behavior (moral masochism) and frank sexual masochism. based on his experience with depressed and self-destructive patients  and pondering the carnage of world war i  freud became dissatisfied with considering only oral and sexual motivations for behavior. by 1920  freud addressed the power of identification (with the leader and with other members) in groups as a motivation for behavior (group psychology and the analysis of the ego). in that same year (1920) freud
suggested his  dual drive  theory of sexuality and aggression in beyond the pleasure principle  to try to begin to explain human destructiveness. also  it was the first appearance of his  structural theory  consisting three new concepts id  ego  and superego.three years later  he summarised the ideas of id  ego  and superego in the ego and the id. in the book  he revised the whole theory of mental functioning  now considering that repression was only one of many defense mechanisms  and that it occurred to reduce anxiety. hence  freud characterised repression as both a cause and a result of anxiety. in 1926  in inhibitions  symptoms and anxiety  freud characterised how intrapsychic conflict among drive and superego (wishes and guilt) caused anxiety  and how that anxiety could lead to an inhibition of mental functions  such as intellect and speech. inhibitions  symptoms and anxiety was written in response to otto rank  who  in 1924  published das trauma der geburt (translated into english in 1929 as the trauma of birth)  analysing how art  myth  religion  philosophy and therapy were illuminated by separation anxiety in the  phase before the development of the oedipus complex . freud s theories  however  characterized no such phase. according to freud  the oedipus complex  was at the centre of neurosis  and was the foundational source of all art  myth  religion  philosophy  therapy—indeed of all human culture and civilization. it was the first time that anyone in the inner circle had characterised something other than the oedipus complex as contributing to intrapsychic development  a notion that was rejected by freud and his followers at the time. by 1936 the  principle of multiple function  was clarified by robert waelder. he widened the formulation that psychological symptoms were caused by and relieved conflict simultaneously. moreover  symptoms (such as phobias and compulsions) each represented elements of some drive wish (sexual and/or aggressive)  superego  anxiety  reality  and defenses. also in 1936  anna freud  sigmund s daughter  published her seminal book  the ego and the mechanisms of defense  outlining numerous ways the mind could shut upsetting things out of consciousness.   === 1940s–present === when hitler s power grew  the freud family and many of their colleagues fled to london. within a year  sigmund freud died.  in the united states  also following the death of freud  a new group of psychoanalysts began to explore the function of the ego.  led by heinz hartmann  kris  rappaport and lowenstein  the group built upon understandings of the synthetic function of the ego as a mediator in psychic functioning. hartmann in particular distinguished between autonomous ego functions (such as memory and intellect which could be secondarily affected by conflict) and synthetic functions which were a result of compromise formation.  these
 ego psychologists  of the 1950s paved a way to focus analytic work by attending to the defenses (mediated by the ego) before exploring the deeper roots to the unconscious conflicts.  in addition there was burgeoning interest in child psychoanalysis.  although criticized since its inception  psychoanalysis has been used as a research tool into childhood development  and is still used to treat certain mental disturbances. in the 1960s  freud s early thoughts on the childhood development of female sexuality were challenged  this challenge led to the development of a variety of understandings of female sexual development  many of which modified the timing and normality of several of freud s theories (which had been gleaned from the treatment of women with mental disturbances). several researchers followed karen horney s studies of societal pressures that influence the development of women. in the first decade of the 21st century  there were approximately 35 training institutes for psychoanalysis in the united states accredited by the american psychoanalytic association (apsaa)  which is a component organization of the international psychoanalytical association (ipa)  and there are over 3000 graduated psychoanalysts practicing in the united states. the ipa accredits psychoanalytic training centers through such  component organisations  throughout the rest of the world  including countries such as serbia  france  germany  austria  italy  switzerland  and many others  as well as about six institutes directly in the united states.   == theories == the predominant psychoanalytic theories can be organised into several theoretical schools. although these theoretical schools differ  most of them emphasize the influence of unconscious elements on the conscious. there has also been considerable work done on consolidating elements of conflicting theories (cf. the work of theodore dorpat  b. killingmo  and s. akhtar). as in all fields of medicine  there are some persistent conflicts regarding specific causes of certain syndromes  and disputes regarding the ideal treatment techniques. in the 21st century  psychoanalytic ideas are embedded in western culture  especially in fields such as childcare  education  literary criticism  cultural studies  mental health  and particularly psychotherapy. though there is a mainstream of evolved analytic ideas  there are groups who follow the precepts of one or more of the later theoreticians. psychoanalytic ideas also play roles in some types of literary analysis such as archetypal literary criticism.   === topographic theory === topographic theory was named and first described by sigmund freud in the interpretation of dreams (1899). the theory hypothesizes that the mental apparatus can be divided into the systems conscious  preconscious  and unconscious. these systems are not anatomical structures of the brain but  rather  mental processes. although freud retained this theory throughout his life he largely replaced it with the structural theory. the topographic theory remains as one of the meta-psychological points of view for describing how the mind functions in classical psychoanalytic theory.   === structural theory === structural theory
divides the psyche into the id  the ego  and the super-ego. the id is present at birth as the repository of basic instincts  which freud called  triebe  ( drives )  unorganized and unconscious  it operates merely on the  pleasure principle  without realism or foresight. the ego develops slowly and gradually  being concerned with mediating between the urging of the id and the realities of the external world  it thus operates on the  reality principle . the super-ego is held to be the part of the ego in which self-observation  self-criticism and other reflective and judgmental faculties develop. the ego and the super-ego are both partly conscious and partly unconscious.   === theoretical and clinical approaches === during the twentieth century  many different clinical and theoretical models of psychoanalysis emerged.   ==== ego psychology ==== ego psychology was initially suggested by freud in inhibitions  symptoms and anxiety (1926). a major step forward was anna freud s work on defense mechanisms  first published in her book the ego and the mechanisms of defence (1936).the theory was refined by hartmann  loewenstein  and kris in a series of papers and books from 1939 through the late 1960s. leo bellak was a later contributor. this series of constructs  paralleling some of the later developments of cognitive theory  includes the notions of autonomous ego functions  mental functions not dependent  at least in origin  on intrapsychic conflict. such functions include  sensory perception  motor control  symbolic thought  logical thought  speech  abstraction  integration (synthesis)  orientation  concentration  judgment about danger  reality testing  adaptive ability  executive decision-making  hygiene  and self-preservation. freud noted that inhibition is one method that the mind may utilize to interfere with any of these functions in order to avoid painful emotions. hartmann (1950s) pointed out that there may be delays or deficits in such functions. frosch (1964) described differences in those people who demonstrated damage to their relationship to reality  but who seemed able to test it. according to ego psychology  ego strengths  later described by otto f. kernberg (1975)  include the capacities to control oral  sexual  and destructive impulses  to tolerate painful affects without falling apart  and to prevent the eruption into consciousness of bizarre symbolic fantasy. synthetic functions  in contrast to autonomous functions  arise from the development of the ego and serve the purpose of managing conflict processes. defenses are synthetic functions that protect the conscious mind from awareness of forbidden impulses and thoughts. one purpose of ego psychology has been to emphasize that some mental functions can be considered to be basic  rather than derivatives of wishes  affects  or defenses. however  autonomous ego functions can be secondarily affected because of unconscious conflict. for example  a patient may have an hysterical amnesia (memory being an autonomous function) because of intrapsychic conflict (wishing
not to remember because it is too painful). taken together  the above theories present a group of metapsychological assumptions. therefore  the inclusive group of the different classical theories provides a cross-sectional view of human mentation. there are six  points of view  five described by freud and a sixth added by hartmann. unconscious processes can therefore be evaluated from each of these six points of view. the  points of view  are  1. topographic 2. dynamic (the theory of conflict) 3. economic (the theory of energy flow) 4. structural 5. genetic (propositions concerning origin and development of psychological functions) and 6. adaptational (psychological phenomena as it relates to the external world).   ==== modern conflict theory ==== modern conflict theory  a variation of ego psychology  is a revised version of structural theory  most notably different by altering concepts related to where repressed thoughts were stored (freud  1923  1926). modern conflict theory addresses emotional symptoms and character traits as complex solutions to mental conflict. it dispenses with the concepts of a fixed id  ego and superego  and instead posits conscious and unconscious conflict among wishes (dependent  controlling  sexual  and aggressive)  guilt and shame  emotions (especially anxiety and depressive affect)  and defensive operations that shut off from consciousness some aspect of the others. moreover  healthy functioning (adaptive) is also determined  to a great extent  by resolutions of conflict. a major objective of modern conflict-theory psychoanalysis is to change the balance of conflict in a patient by making aspects of the less adaptive solutions (also called  compromise formations ) conscious so that they can be rethought  and more adaptive solutions found. current theoreticians following brenner s many suggestions (see especially brenner s 1982 book  the mind in conflict) include sandor abend  md (abend  porder  & willick  (1983)  borderline patients  clinical perspectives)  jacob arlow (arlow and brenner (1964)  psychoanalytic concepts and the structural theory)  and jerome blackman (2003)  101 defenses  how the mind shields itself.   ==== object relations theory ==== object relations theory attempts to explain the ups and downs of human relationships through a study of how internal representations of the self and others are organized. the clinical symptoms that suggest object relations problems (typically developmental delays throughout life) include disturbances in an individual s capacity to feel warmth  empathy  trust  sense of security  identity stability  consistent emotional closeness  and stability in relationships with significant others. (it is not suggested that one should trust everyone  for example.) concepts regarding internal representations (also sometimes termed   introspects   self and object representations  or  internalization of self and other ) although often attributed to melanie klein  were actually first mentioned by sigmund freud in his early concepts of drive theory (three essays on the theory of sexuality  1905). freud s 1917 paper  mourning and melancholia
 for example  hypothesized that unresolved grief was caused by the survivor s internalized image of the deceased becoming fused with that of the survivor  and then the survivor shifting unacceptable anger toward the deceased onto the now complex self-image.vamik volkan  in  linking objects and linking phenomena  expanded on freud s thoughts on this  describing the syndromes of  established pathological mourning  vs.  reactive depression  based on similar dynamics. melanie klein s hypotheses regarding internalization during the first year of life  leading to paranoid and depressive positions  were later challenged by rené spitz (e.g.  the first year of life  1965)  who divided the first year of life into a coenesthetic phase of the first six months  and then a diacritic phase for the second six months. margaret mahler (mahler  fine  and bergman  the psychological birth of the human infant  1975) and her group  first in new york  then in philadelphia  described distinct phases and subphases of child development leading to  separation-individuation  during the first three years of life  stressing the importance of constancy of parental figures  in the face of the child s destructive aggression  to the child s internalizations  stability of affect management  and ability to develop healthy autonomy. john frosch  otto kernberg  salman akhtar and sheldon bach have developed the theory of self and object constancy as it affects adult psychiatric problems such as psychosis and borderline states.  peter blos described (in a book called on adolescence  1960) how similar separation-individuation struggles occur during adolescence  of course with a different outcome from the first three years of life  the teen usually  eventually  leaves the parents  house (this varies with the culture). during adolescence  erik erikson (1950–1960s) described the  identity crisis  that involves identity-diffusion anxiety. in order for an adult to be able to experience  warm-ethics  (warmth  empathy  trust  holding environment (winnicott)  identity  closeness  and stability) in relationships (see blackman  101 defenses  how the mind shields itself  2001)  the teenager must resolve the problems with identity and redevelop self and object constancy.   ==== self psychology ==== self psychology emphasizes the development of a stable and integrated sense of self through empathic contacts with other humans  primary significant others conceived of as  selfobjects . selfobjects meet the developing self s needs for mirroring  idealization  and twinship  and thereby strengthen the developing self.  the process of treatment proceeds through  transmuting internalizations  in which the patient gradually internalizes the selfobject functions provided by the therapist. self psychology was proposed originally by heinz kohut  and has been further developed by arnold goldberg  frank lachmann  paul and anna ornstein  marian tolpin  and others.   ==== jacques lacan and lacanian psychoanalysis ==== lacanian psychoanalysis  which integrates psychoanalysis
with structural linguistics and hegelian philosophy  is especially popular in france and parts of latin america. lacanian psychoanalysis is a departure from the traditional british and american psychoanalysis  which is predominantly ego psychology. jacques lacan frequently used the phrase  retourner à freud  ( return to freud ) in his seminars and writings  as he claimed that his theories were an extension of freud s own  contrary to those of anna freud  the ego psychology  object relations and  self  theories and also claims the necessity of reading freud s complete works  not only a part of them. lacan s concepts concern the  mirror stage  the  real  the  imaginary  and the  symbolic  and the claim that  the unconscious is structured as a language .though a major influence on psychoanalysis in france and parts of latin america  lacan and his ideas have taken longer to be translated into english and he has thus had a lesser impact on psychoanalysis and psychotherapy in the english-speaking world. in the united kingdom and the united states  his ideas are most widely used to analyze texts in literary theory. due to his increasingly critical stance towards the deviation from freud s thought  often singling out particular texts and readings from his colleagues  lacan was excluded from acting as a training analyst in the ipa  thus leading him to create his own school in order to maintain an institutional structure for the many candidates who desired to continue their analysis with him.   ==== interpersonal psychoanalysis ==== interpersonal psychoanalysis accents the nuances of interpersonal interactions  particularly how individuals protect themselves from anxiety by establishing collusive interactions with others  and the relevance of actual experiences with other persons developmentally (e.g. family and peers) as well as in the present.  this is contrasted with the primacy of intrapsychic forces  as in classical psychoanalysis.  interpersonal theory was first introduced by harry stack sullivan  md  and developed further by frieda fromm-reichmann  clara thompson  erich fromm  and others who contributed to the founding of the william alanson white institute and interpersonal psychoanalysis in general.   ==== culturalist psychoanalysis ====  some psychoanalysts have been labeled culturalist  because of the prominence they attributed culture in the genesis of behavior. among others  erich fromm  karen horney  harry stack sullivan  have been called culturalist psychoanalysts. they were famously in conflict with orthodox psychoanalysts.   ==== feminist psychoanalysis ==== feminist theories of psychoanalysis emerged towards the second half of the 20th century  in an effort to articulate the feminine  the maternal and sexual difference and development from the point of view of female subjects. for freud  male is subject and female is object. for freud  winnicott and the object relations theories  the mother is structured as the object of the infant s rejection (freud) and destruction (winnicott). for lacan  the
 woman  can either accept the phallic symbolic as an object or incarnate a lack in the symbolic dimension that informs the structure of the human subject. feminist psychoanalysis is mainly post-freudian and post-lacanian with theorists like toril moi  joan copjec  juliet mitchell  teresa brennan and griselda pollock  following french feminist psychoanalysis  the gaze and sexual difference in  of and from the feminine. french theorists like luce irigaray challenge phallogocentrism. bracha ettinger offers a  matrixial  subject s dimension that brings into account the prenatal stage (matrixial connectivity) and suggests a feminine-maternal eros  matrixial gaze and primal mother-phantasies. jessica benjamin addresses the question of the feminine and love. feminist psychoanalysis informs and includes gender  queer and post-feminist theories.   ==== adaptive paradigm of psychoanalysis and psychotherapy ====  the  adaptive paradigm of psychotherapy  develops out of the work of robert langs. the adaptive paradigm interprets psychic conflict primarily in terms of conscious and unconscious adaptation to reality. langs’ recent work in some measure returns to the earlier freud  in that langs prefers a modified version of the topographic model of the mind (conscious  preconscious  and unconscious) over the structural model (id  ego  and super-ego)  including the former s emphasis on trauma (though langs looks to death-related traumas rather than sexual traumas). at the same time  langs’ model of the mind differs from freud s in that it understands the mind in terms of evolutionary biological principles.   ==== relational psychoanalysis ==== relational psychoanalysis combines interpersonal psychoanalysis with object-relations theory and with inter-subjective theory as critical for mental health. it was introduced by stephen mitchell. relational psychoanalysis stresses how the individual s personality is shaped by both real and imagined relationships with others  and how these relationship patterns are re-enacted in the interactions between analyst and patient. in new york  key proponents of relational psychoanalysis include lew aron  jessica benjamin  and adrienne harris. fonagy and target  in london  have propounded their view of the necessity of helping certain detached  isolated patients  develop the capacity for  mentalization  associated with thinking about relationships and themselves. arietta slade  susan coates  and daniel schechter in new york have additionally contributed to the application of relational psychoanalysis to treatment of the adult patient-as-parent  the clinical study of mentalization in parent-infant relationships  and the intergenerational transmission of attachment and trauma.   ==== interpersonal-relational psychoanalysis ==== the term interpersonal-relational psychoanalysis is often used as a professional identification.  psychoanalysts under this broader umbrella debate about what precisely are the differences between the two schools  without any current clear consensus.   ==== intersubjective psychoanalysis ==== the term  intersubjectivity  was introduced in psychoanalysis by george e. atwood and robert stolorow (1984). intersubjective approaches emphasize how both personality development and the therapeutic process are influenced by the interrelationship between the patient s subjective perspective and that of others. the authors of the interpersonal-relational
and intersubjective approaches  otto rank  heinz kohut  stephen a. mitchell  jessica benjamin  bernard brandchaft  j. fosshage  donna m.orange  arnold  arnie  mindell  thomas ogden  owen renik  irwin z. hoffman  harold searles  colwyn trevarthen  edgar a. levenson  jay greenberg  edward r. ritvo  beatrice beebe  frank m. lachmann  herbert rosenfeld and daniel stern.   ==== modern psychoanalysis ====  modern psychoanalysis   is a term coined by hyman spotnitz and his colleagues to describe a body of theoretical and clinical approaches that aim to extend freud s theories so as to make them applicable to the full spectrum of emotional disorders and broaden the potential for treatment to pathologies thought to be untreatable by classical methods. interventions based on this approach are primarily intended to provide an emotional-maturational communication to the patient  rather than to promote intellectual insight. these interventions  beyond insight directed aims  are used to resolve resistances that are presented in the clinical setting. this school of psychoanalysis has fostered training opportunities for students in the united states and from countries worldwide. its journal modern psychoanalysis has been published since 1976.   == psychopathology (mental disturbances) ==   === adult patients === the various psychoses involve deficits in the autonomous ego functions (see above) of integration (organization) of thought  in abstraction ability  in relationship to reality and in reality testing. in depressions with psychotic features  the self-preservation function may also be damaged (sometimes by overwhelming depressive affect). because of the integrative deficits (often causing what general psychiatrists call  loose associations   blocking   flight of ideas   verbigeration  and  thought withdrawal )  the development of self and object representations is also impaired. clinically  therefore  psychotic individuals manifest limitations in warmth  empathy  trust  identity  closeness and/or stability in relationships (due to problems with self-object fusion anxiety) as well. in patients whose autonomous ego functions are more intact  but who still show problems with object relations  the diagnosis often falls into the category known as  borderline .  borderline patients also show deficits  often in controlling impulses  affects  or fantasies – but their ability to test reality remains more or less intact. adults who do not experience guilt and shame  and who indulge in criminal behavior  are usually diagnosed as psychopaths  or  using dsm-iv-tr  antisocial personality disorder. panic  phobias  conversions  obsessions  compulsions and depressions (analysts call these  neurotic symptoms ) are not usually caused by deficits in functions. instead  they are caused by intrapsychic conflicts. the conflicts are generally among sexual and hostile-aggressive wishes  guilt and shame  and reality factors. the conflicts may be conscious or unconscious  but create anxiety  depressive affect  and anger. finally  the various elements are managed by defensive operations – essentially shut-off brain mechanisms
that make people unaware of that element of conflict.   repression  is the term given to the mechanism that shuts thoughts out of consciousness.   isolation of affect  is the term used for the mechanism that shuts sensations out of consciousness. neurotic symptoms may occur with or without deficits in ego functions  object relations  and ego strengths. therefore  it is not uncommon to encounter obsessive-compulsive schizophrenics  panic patients who also suffer with borderline personality disorder  etc. this section above is partial to ego psychoanalytic theory  autonomous ego functions .  as the  autonomous ego functions  theory is only a theory  it may yet be proven incorrect.   === childhood origins === freudian theories hold that adult problems can be traced to unresolved conflicts from certain phases of childhood and adolescence  caused by fantasy  stemming from their own drives. freud  based on the data gathered from his patients early in his career  suspected that neurotic disturbances occurred when children were sexually abused in childhood (the so-called seduction theory). later  freud came to believe that  although child abuse occurs  neurotic symptoms were not associated with this. he believed that neurotic people often had unconscious conflicts that involved incestuous fantasies deriving from different stages of development. he found the stage from about three to six years of age (preschool years  today called the  first genital stage ) to be filled with fantasies of having romantic relationships with both parents. arguments were quickly generated in early 20th-century vienna about whether adult seduction of children  i.e. child sexual abuse  was the basis of neurotic illness. there still is no complete agreement  although nowadays professionals recognize the negative effects of child sexual abuse on mental health.many psychoanalysts who work with children have studied the actual effects of child abuse  which include ego and object relations deficits and severe neurotic conflicts. much research has been done on these types of trauma in childhood  and the adult sequelae of those. in studying the childhood factors that start neurotic symptom development  freud found a constellation of factors that  for literary reasons  he termed the oedipus complex (based on the play by sophocles  oedipus rex  where the protagonist unwittingly kills his father laius and marries his mother jocasta). the validity of the oedipus complex is now widely disputed and rejected. the shorthand term   oedipal  — later explicated by joseph j. sandler in  on the concept superego  (1960) and modified by charles brenner in the mind in conflict (1982) — refers to the powerful attachments that children make to their parents in the preschool years. these attachments involve fantasies of sexual relationships with either (or both) parent  and  therefore  competitive fantasies toward either (or both) parents.  humberto nagera (1975) has been particularly helpful in clarifying many of the complexities of the child through these years.  positive  and  negative
 oedipal conflicts have been attached to the heterosexual and homosexual aspects  respectively. both seem to occur in development of most children. eventually  the developing child s concessions to reality (that they will neither marry one parent nor eliminate the other) lead to identifications with parental values. these identifications generally create a new set of mental operations regarding values and guilt  subsumed under the term  superego .  besides superego development  children  resolve  their preschool oedipal conflicts through channeling wishes into something their parents approve of ( sublimation ) and the development  during the school-age years ( latency ) of age-appropriate obsessive-compulsive defensive maneuvers (rules  repetitive games).   == treatment == using the various analytic and psychological techniques to assess mental problems  some believe that there are particular constellations of problems that are especially suited for analytic treatment (see below) whereas other problems might respond better to medicines and other interpersonal interventions. to be treated with psychoanalysis  whatever the presenting problem  the person requesting help must demonstrate a desire to start an analysis.  the person wishing to start an analysis must have some capacity for speech and communication. as well  they need to be able to have or develop trust and insight within the psychoanalytic session. potential patients must undergo a preliminary stage of treatment to assess their amenability to psychoanalysis at that time  and also to enable the analyst to form a working psychological model  which the analyst will use to direct the treatment.  psychoanalysts mainly work with neurosis and hysteria in particular  however  adapted forms of psychoanalysis are used in working with schizophrenia and other forms of psychosis or mental disorder. finally  if a prospective patient is severely suicidal a longer preliminary stage may be employed  sometimes with sessions which have a twenty-minute break in the middle. there are numerous modifications in technique under the heading of psychoanalysis due to the individualistic nature of personality in both analyst and patient. the most common problems treatable with psychoanalysis include  phobias  conversions  compulsions  obsessions  anxiety attacks  depressions  sexual dysfunctions  a wide variety of relationship problems (such as dating and marital strife)  and a wide variety of character problems (for example  painful shyness  meanness  obnoxiousness  workaholism  hyperseductiveness  hyperemotionality  hyperfastidiousness). the fact that many of such patients also demonstrate deficits above makes diagnosis and treatment selection difficult. analytical organizations such as the ipa  apsaa and the european federation for psychoanalytic psychotherapy have established procedures and models for the indication and practice of psychoanalytical therapy for trainees in analysis. the match between the analyst and the patient can be viewed as another contributing factor for the indication and contraindication for psychoanalytic treatment. the analyst decides whether the patient is suitable for psychoanalysis. this decision made by the analyst  besides made on the usual indications and pathology  is also based to a certain degree by
the  fit  between analyst and patient. a person s suitability for analysis at any particular time is based on their desire to know something about where their illness has come from.  someone who is not suitable for analysis expresses no desire to know more about the root causes of their illness. an evaluation may include one or more other analysts  independent opinions and will include discussion of the patient s financial situation and insurances.   === techniques === the basic method of psychoanalysis is interpretation of the patient s unconscious conflicts that are interfering with current-day functioning – conflicts that are causing painful symptoms such as phobias  anxiety  depression  and compulsions. strachey (1936) stressed that figuring out ways the patient distorted perceptions about the analyst led to understanding what may have been forgotten (also see freud s paper  repeating  remembering  and working through ). in particular  unconscious hostile feelings toward the analyst could be found in symbolic  negative reactions to what robert langs later called the  frame  of the therapy – the setup that included times of the sessions  payment of fees  and necessity of talking. in patients who made mistakes  forgot  or showed other peculiarities regarding time  fees  and talking  the analyst can usually find various unconscious  resistances  to the flow of thoughts (sometimes called free association). when the patient reclines on a couch with the analyst out of view  the patient tends to remember more experiences  more resistance and transference  and is able to reorganize thoughts after the development of insight – through the interpretive work of the analyst. although fantasy life can be understood through the examination of dreams  masturbation fantasies (cf. marcus  i. and francis  j. (1975)  masturbation from infancy to senescence) are also important. the analyst is interested in how the patient reacts to and avoids such fantasies (cf. paul gray (1994)  the ego and the analysis of defense).  various memories of early life are generally distorted – freud called them  screen memories  – and in any case  very early experiences (before age two) – cannot be remembered (see the child studies of eleanor galenson on  evocative memory ).   ==== variations in technique ==== there is what is known among psychoanalysts as  classical technique  although freud throughout his writings deviated from this considerably  depending on the problems of any given patient. classical technique was summarized by allan compton  md  as comprising instructions (telling the patient to try to say what s on their mind  including interferences)  exploration (asking questions)  and clarification (rephrasing and summarizing what the patient has been describing). as well  the analyst can also use confrontation to bringing an aspect of functioning  usually a defense  to the patient s attention. the analyst then uses a variety of interpretation methods  such as dynamic interpretation (explaining
how being too nice guards against guilt  e.g. – defense vs. affect)  genetic interpretation (explaining how a past event is influencing the present)  resistance interpretation (showing the patient how they are avoiding their problems)  transference interpretation (showing the patient ways old conflicts arise in current relationships  including that with the analyst)  or dream interpretation (obtaining the patient s thoughts about their dreams and connecting this with their current problems). analysts can also use reconstruction to estimate what may have happened in the past that created some current issue. these techniques are primarily based on conflict theory (see above). as object relations theory evolved  supplemented by the work of john bowlby and mary ainsworth  techniques with patients who had more severe problems with basic trust (erikson  1950) and a history of maternal deprivation (see the works of augusta alpert) led to new techniques with adults. these have sometimes been called interpersonal  intersubjective (cf. stolorow)  relational  or corrective object relations techniques. these techniques include expressing an empathic attunement to the patient or warmth  exposing a bit of the analyst s personal life or attitudes to the patient  allowing the patient autonomy in the form of disagreement with the analyst (cf. i.h. paul  letters to simon)  and explaining the motivations of others which the patient misperceives. ego psychological concepts of deficit in functioning led to refinements in supportive therapy. these techniques are particularly applicable to psychotic and near-psychotic (cf.  eric marcus   psychosis and near-psychosis ) patients. these supportive therapy techniques include discussions of reality  encouragement to stay alive (including hospitalization)  psychotropic medicines to relieve overwhelming depressive affect or overwhelming fantasies (hallucinations and delusions)  and advice about the meanings of things (to counter abstraction failures). the notion of the  silent analyst  has been criticized. actually  the analyst listens using arlow s approach as set out in  the genesis of interpretation  using active intervention to interpret resistances  defenses creating pathology  and fantasies. silence is not a technique of psychoanalysis (also see the studies and opinion papers of owen renik  md).  analytic neutrality  is a concept that does not mean the analyst is silent. it refers to the analyst s position of not taking sides in the internal struggles of the patient. for example  if a patient feels guilty  the analyst might explore what the patient has been doing or thinking that causes the guilt  but not reassure the patient not to feel guilty. the analyst might also explore the identifications with parents and others that led to the guilt. interpersonal–relational psychoanalysts emphasize the notion that it is impossible to be neutral. sullivan introduced the term  participant-observer  to indicate the analyst inevitably interacts with the analysand  and suggested the detailed inquiry as an alternative to interpretation.  the detailed inquiry involves noting where the analysand is leaving out important elements of an account and noting when the story is obfuscated
 and asking careful questions to open up the dialogue.   === group therapy and play therapy === although single-client sessions remain the norm  psychoanalytic theory has been used to develop other types of psychological treatment. psychoanalytic group therapy was pioneered by trigant burrow  joseph pratt  paul f. schilder  samuel r. slavson  harry stack sullivan  and wolfe. child-centered counseling for parents was instituted early in analytic history by freud  and was later further developed by irwin marcus  edith schulhofer  and gilbert kliman. psychoanalytically based couples therapy has been promulgated and explicated by fred sander  md. techniques and tools developed in the first decade of the 21st century have made psychoanalysis available to patients who were not treatable by earlier techniques. this meant that the analytic situation was modified so that it would be more suitable and more likely to be helpful for these patients. m.n. eagle (2007) believes that psychoanalysis cannot be a self-contained discipline but instead must be open to influence from and integration with findings and theory from other disciplines.psychoanalytic constructs have been adapted for use with children with treatments such as play therapy  art therapy  and storytelling. throughout her career  from the 1920s through the 1970s  anna freud adapted psychoanalysis for children through play. this is still used today for children  especially those who are preadolescent (see leon hoffman  new york psychoanalytic institute center for children). using toys and games  children are able to symbolically demonstrate their fears  fantasies  and defenses  although not identical  this technique  in children  is analogous to the aim of free association in adults. psychoanalytic play therapy allows the child and analyst to understand children s conflicts  particularly defenses such as disobedience and withdrawal  that have been guarding against various unpleasant feelings and hostile wishes. in art therapy  the counselor may have a child draw a portrait and then tell a story about the portrait. the counselor watches for recurring themes—regardless of whether it is with art or toys.   === cultural variations === psychoanalysis can be adapted to different cultures  as long as the therapist or counselor understands the client s culture. for example  tori and blimes found that defense mechanisms were valid in a normative sample of 2 624 thais. the use of certain defense mechanisms was related to cultural values. for example  thais value calmness and collectiveness (because of buddhist beliefs)  so they were low on regressive emotionality. psychoanalysis also applies because freud used techniques that allowed him to get the subjective perceptions of his patients. he takes an objective approach by not facing his clients during his talk therapy sessions. he met with his patients wherever they were  such as when he used free association — where clients would say whatever came to mind without self-censorship. his treatments had little to no structure for most cultures  especially asian cultures. therefore  it is more likely that freudian
constructs will be used in structured therapy (thompson  et al.  2004). in addition  corey postulates that it will be necessary for a therapist to help clients develop a cultural identity as well as an ego identity.   === cost and length of treatment === the cost to the patient of psychoanalytic treatment ranges widely from place to place and between practitioners. low-fee analysis is often available in a psychoanalytic training clinic and graduate schools. otherwise  the fee set by each analyst varies with the analyst s training and experience. since  in most locations in the united states  unlike in ontario and germany  classical analysis (which usually requires sessions three to five times per week) is not covered by health insurance  many analysts may negotiate their fees with patients whom they feel they can help  but who have financial difficulties. the modifications of analysis  which include psychodynamic therapy  brief therapies  and certain types of group therapy (cf. slavson  s. r.  a textbook in analytic group therapy)  are carried out on a less frequent basis – usually once  twice  or three times a week – and usually the patient sits facing the therapist. as a result of the defense mechanisms and the lack of access to the unfathomable elements of the unconscious  psychoanalysis can be an expansive process that involves 2 to 5 sessions per week for several years. this type of therapy relies on the belief that reducing the symptoms will not actually help with the root causes or irrational drives. the analyst typically is a  blank screen  disclosing very little about themselves in order that the client can use the space in the relationship to work on their unconscious without interference from outside. the psychoanalyst uses various methods to help the patient to become more self-aware and to develop insights into their behavior and into the meanings of symptoms. first and foremost  the psychoanalyst attempts to develop a confidential atmosphere in which the patient can feel safe reporting his feelings  thoughts and fantasies. analysands (as people in analysis are called) are asked to report whatever comes to mind without fear of reprisal. freud called this  the  fundamental rule . analysands are asked to talk about their lives  including their early life  current life and hopes and aspirations for the future. they are encouraged to report their fantasies   flash thoughts  and dreams. in fact  freud believed that dreams were   the royal road to the unconscious  he devoted an entire volume to the interpretation of dreams. also  psychoanalysts encourage their patients to recline on a couch. typically  the psychoanalyst sits  out of sight  behind the patient. the psychoanalyst s task  in collaboration with the analysand  is to help deepen the analysand s understanding of those factors  outside of his awareness  that drive his behaviors. in the safe environment of the psychoanalytic setting
 the analysand becomes attached to the analyst and pretty soon he begins to experience the same conflicts with his analyst that he experiences with key figures in his life such as his parents  his boss  his significant other  etc. it is the psychoanalyst s role to point out these conflicts and to interpret them. the transferring of these internal conflicts onto the analyst is called  transference . many studies have also been done on briefer  dynamic  treatments  these are more expedient to measure  and shed light on the therapeutic process to some extent. brief relational therapy (brt)  brief psychodynamic therapy (bpt)  and time-limited dynamic therapy (tldp) limit treatment to 20–30 sessions. on average  classical analysis may last 5.7 years  but for phobias and depressions uncomplicated by ego deficits or object relations deficits  analysis may run for a shorter period of time. longer analyses are indicated for those with more serious disturbances in object relations  more symptoms  and more ingrained character pathology.   == training and research ==   === united states === psychoanalytic training in the united states involves a personal psychoanalysis for the trainee  approximately 600 hours of class instruction  with a standard curriculum  over a four or five-year period. typically  this psychoanalysis must be conducted by a supervising and training analyst. most institutes (but not all) within the american psychoanalytic association  require that supervising and training analysts become certified by the american board of psychoanalysts. certification entails a blind review in which the psychoanalyst s work is vetted by psychoanalysts outside of their local community. after earning certification  these psychoanalysts undergo another hurdle in which they are specially vetted by senior members of their own institute. supervising and training analysts are held to the highest clinical and ethical standards. moreover  they are required to have extensive experience conducting psychoanalyses. similarly  class instruction for psychoanalytic candidates is rigorous. typically classes meet several hours a week  or for a full day or two every other weekend during the academic year  this varies with the institute. candidates generally have an hour of supervision each week  with a supervising and training analyst  on each psychoanalytic case. the minimum number of cases varies between institutes  often two to four cases. male and female cases are required. supervision must go on for at least a few years on one or more cases. supervision is done in the supervisor s office  where the trainee presents material from the psychoanalytic work that week. in supervision  the patient s unconscious conflicts are explored  also  transference-countertransference constellations are examined. also  clinical technique is taught. many psychoanalytic training centers in the united states have been accredited by special committees of the apsaa or the ipa. because of theoretical differences  there are independent institutes  usually founded by psychologists  who until 1987 were not permitted access to psychoanalytic training institutes of the apsaa. currently
there are between 75 and 100 independent institutes in the united states.  as well  other institutes are affiliated to other organizations such as the american academy of psychoanalysis and dynamic psychiatry  and the national association for the advancement of psychoanalysis. at most psychoanalytic institutes in the united states  qualifications for entry include a terminal degree in a mental health field  such as ph.d.  psy.d.  m.s.w.  or m.d. a few institutes restrict applicants to those already holding an m.d. or ph.d.  and most institutes in southern california confer a ph.d. or psy.d. in psychoanalysis upon graduation  which involves completion of the necessary requirements for the state boards that confer that doctoral degree. the first training institute in america to educate non-medical psychoanalysts was the national psychological association for psychoanalysis (1978) in new york city. it was founded by the analyst theodor reik. the contemporary freudian (originally the new york freudian society) an offshoot of the national psychological association has a branch in washington  dc.  it is a component society/institute or the ipa. some psychoanalytic training has been set up as a post-doctoral fellowship in university settings  such as at duke university  yale university  new york university  adelphi university and columbia university. other psychoanalytic institutes may not be directly associated with universities  but the faculty at those institutes usually hold contemporaneous faculty positions with psychology ph.d. programs and/or with medical school psychiatry residency programs. the ipa is the world s primary accrediting and regulatory body for psychoanalysis. their mission is to assure the continued vigor and development of psychoanalysis for the benefit of psychoanalytic patients. it works in partnership with its 70 constituent organizations in 33 countries to support 11 500 members. in the us  there are 77 psychoanalytical organizations  institutes associations in the united states  which are spread across the states of america. apsaa has 38 affiliated societies which have 10 or more active members who practice in a given geographical area. the aims of apsaa and other psychoanalytical organizations are  provide ongoing educational opportunities for its members  stimulate the development and research of psychoanalysis  provide training and organize conferences. there are eight affiliated study groups in the united states. a study group is the first level of integration of a psychoanalytical body within the ipa  followed by a provisional society and finally a member society. the division of psychoanalysis (39) of the american psychological association (apa) was established in the early 1980s by several psychologists.  until the establishment of the division of psychoanalysis  psychologists who had trained in independent institutes had no national organization. the division of psychoanalysis now has approximately 4 000 members and approximately 30 local chapters in the united states.  the division of psychoanalysis holds two annual meetings or conferences and offers continuing education in theory  research and clinical technique  as do their affiliated local chapters. the european psychoanalytical federation (epf) is the organization which consolidates all european psychoanalytic societies.
this organization is affiliated with the ipa. in 2002 there were approximately 3 900 individual members in 22 countries  speaking 18 different languages. there are also 25 psychoanalytic societies. the american association of psychoanalysis in clinical social work (aapcsw) was established by crayton rowe in 1980 as a division of the federation of clinical societies of social work and became an independent entity in 1990.  until 2007 it was known as the national membership committee on psychoanalysis.  the organization was founded because although social workers represented the larger number of people who were training to be psychoanalysts  they were underrepresented as supervisors and teachers at the institutes they attended.  aapcsw now has over 1000 members and has over 20 chapters.  it holds a bi-annual national conference and numerous annual local conferences. experiences of psychoanalysts and psychoanalytic psychotherapists and research into infant and child development have led to new insights. theories have been further developed and the results of empirical research are now more integrated in the psychoanalytic theory.   === united kingdom === the london psychoanalytical society was founded by ernest jones on 30 october 1913. with the expansion of psychoanalysis in the united kingdom the society was renamed the british psychoanalytical society in 1919. soon after  the institute of psychoanalysis was established to administer the society s activities. these include  the training of psychoanalysts  the development of the theory and practice of psychoanalysis  the provision of treatment through the london clinic of psychoanalysis  the publication of books in the new library of psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic ideas. the institute of psychoanalysis also publishes the international journal of psychoanalysis  maintains a library  furthers research  and holds public lectures. the society has a code of ethics and an ethical committee. the society  the institute and the clinic are all located at byron house. the society is a component of the ipa  a body with members on all five continents that safeguards professional and ethical practice. the society is a member of the british psychoanalytic council (bpc)  the bpc publishes a register of british psychoanalysts and psychoanalytical psychotherapists. all members of the british psychoanalytical society are required to undertake continuing professional development. members of the society have included michael balint  wilfred bion  john bowlby  anna freud  melanie klein  joseph j. sandler  and donald winnicott. the institute of psychoanalysis is the foremost publisher of psychoanalytic literature. the 24-volume standard edition of the complete psychological works of sigmund freud was conceived  translated  and produced under the direction of the british psychoanalytical society. the society  in conjunction with random house  will soon publish a new  revised and expanded standard edition. with the new library of psychoanalysis the institute continues to publish the books of leading theorists and practitioners. the international journal of psychoanalysis is published by the institute of psychoanalysis. now in its 84th year  it has one of the largest circulations of any psychoanalytic journal.  
=== research === over a hundred years of case reports and studies in the journal modern psychoanalysis  the psychoanalytic quarterly  the international journal of psychoanalysis and the journal of the american psychoanalytic association have analyzed the efficacy of analysis in cases of neurosis and character or personality problems. psychoanalysis modified by object relations techniques has been shown to be effective in many cases of ingrained problems of intimacy and relationship (cf. the many books of otto kernberg). psychoanalytic treatment  in other situations  may run from about a year to many years  depending on the severity and complexity of the pathology. psychoanalytic theory has  from its inception  been the subject of criticism and controversy. freud remarked on this early in his career  when other physicians in vienna ostracized him for his findings that hysterical conversion symptoms were not limited to women. challenges to analytic theory began with otto rank and alfred adler (turn of the 20th century)  continued with behaviorists (e.g. wolpe) into the 1940s and  50s  and have persisted (e.g. miller). criticisms come from those who object to the notion that there are mechanisms  thoughts or feelings in the mind that could be unconscious. criticisms also have been leveled against the idea of  infantile sexuality  (the recognition that children between ages two and six imagine things about procreation). criticisms of theory have led to variations in analytic theories  such as the work of ronald fairbairn  michael balint  and john bowlby. in the past 30 years or so  the criticisms have centered on the issue of empirical verification.psychoanalysis has been used as a research tool into childhood development (cf. the journal the psychoanalytic study of the child)  and has developed into a flexible  effective treatment for certain mental disturbances. in the 1960s  freud s early (1905) thoughts on the childhood development of female sexuality were challenged  this challenge led to major research in the 1970s and 80s  and then to a reformulation of female sexual development that corrected some of freud s concepts. also see the various works of eleanor galenson  nancy chodorow  karen horney  françoise dolto  melanie klein  selma fraiberg  and others. most recently  psychoanalytic researchers who have integrated attachment theory into their work  including alicia lieberman  susan coates  and daniel schechter have explored the role of parental traumatization in the development of young children s mental representations of self and others.there are different forms of psychoanalysis and psychotherapies in which psychoanalytic thinking is practiced. besides classical psychoanalysis there is for example psychoanalytic psychotherapy  a therapeutic approach which widens  the accessibility of psychoanalytic theory and clinical practices that had evolved over 100 plus years to a larger number of individuals.  other examples of well known therapies which also use insights of psychoanalysis are mentalization-based treatment (mbt)  and transference focused psychotherapy (tfp). there is also a continuing influence of psychoanalytic thinking in mental health care. 
 == evaluation of effectiveness ==   === background === the psychoanalytic profession has been resistant to researching efficacy. effectiveness measures based on the interpretation of the therapist alone cannot be proven.   === research results === research results have tended to support views of long-term efficacy. a 2015 study found evidence of better long-term outcomes for depression after psychoanalysis.meta-analyses in 2012 and 2013 found support or evidence for the efficacy of psychoanalytic therapy  thus further research is needed. other meta-analyses published in the recent years showed psychoanalysis and psychodynamic therapy to be effective  with outcomes comparable or greater than other kinds of psychotherapy or antidepressant drugs  but these arguments have also been subjected to various criticisms. in particular  the inclusion of pre/post studies rather than randomized controlled trials  and the absence of adequate comparisons with control treatments is a serious limitation in interpreting the results.in 2011  the american psychological association made 103 comparisons between psychodynamic treatment and a non-dynamic competitor and found that 6 were superior  5 were inferior  28 had no difference and 63 were adequate. the study found that this could be used as a basis  to make psychodynamic psychotherapy an  empirically validated  treatment. meta-analyses of short term psychodynamic psychotherapy (stpp) have found effect sizes (cohen s d) ranging from .34–.71 compared to no treatment and was found to be slightly better than other therapies in follow up. other reviews have found an effect size of .78–.91 for somatic disorders compared to no treatment  and .69 for treating depression. a 2012 meta-analysis by the harvard review of psychiatry of intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy (istdp) found effect sizes ranging from .84 for interpersonal problems to 1.51 for depression. overall istdp had an effect size of 1.18 compared to no treatment.a meta-analysis of long term psychodynamic psychotherapy in 2012 found an overall effect size of .33  which is modest. this study concluded the recovery rate following ltpp was equal to control treatments  including treatment as usual  and found the evidence for the effectiveness of ltpp to be limited and at best conflicting. others have found effect sizes of .44–.68.according to a 2004 french review conducted by inserm  psychoanalysis was presumed or proven effective at treating panic disorder  post-traumatic stress and personality disorders.the world s largest randomized controlled trial on therapy with anorexia nervosa outpatients  the antop-study  published 2013 in the lancet  found evidence that modified psychodynamic therapy is effective in increasing body mass index after a 10-month treatment and that the effect is persistent until at least a year after concluding the treatment. relative to other treatments assigned  it was found to be as effective in increasing body mass index as cognitive behavioral therapy and as a standard treatment protocol (which consisted of referral to a list of psychotherapists with experience in treating eating-disorders in addition to close monitoring and treatment by a family doctor). furthermore  considering the outcome to be the recovery rate one year after
the treatment  measured by the proportion of patients who no longer met the diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa  modified psychodynamic therapy was found to be more effective than the standard treatment protocol and as effective as cognitive behavioral therapy.a 2001 systematic review of the medical literature by the cochrane collaboration concluded that no data exist demonstrating that psychodynamic psychotherapy is effective in treating schizophrenia and severe mental illness  and cautioned that medication should always be used alongside any type of talk therapy in schizophrenia cases. a french review from 2004 found the same. the schizophrenia patient outcomes research team advises against the use of psychodynamic therapy in cases of schizophrenia  arguing that more trials are necessary to verify its effectiveness.   == criticism ==   === as a field of science ===  both freud and psychoanalysis have been criticized in extreme terms. exchanges between critics and defenders of psychoanalysis have often been so heated that they have come to be characterized as the freud wars.early critics of psychoanalysis believed that its theories were based too little on quantitative and experimental research  and too much on the clinical case study method. some have accused freud of fabrication  most famously in the case of anna o. the philosopher frank cioffi cites false claims of a sound scientific verification of the theory and its elements as the strongest basis for classifying the work of freud and his school as pseudoscience. others have speculated that patients suffered from now easily identifiable conditions unrelated to psychoanalysis  for instance  anna o. is thought to have suffered from an organic impairment such as tuberculous meningitis or temporal lobe epilepsy and not hysteria (see modern interpretations).karl popper argued that psychoanalysis is a pseudoscience because its claims are not testable and cannot be refuted  that is  they are not falsifiable. imre lakatos later wrote that   freudians have been nonplussed by popper s basic challenge concerning scientific honesty. indeed  they have refused to specify experimental conditions under which they would give up their basic assumptions.  the philosopher roger scruton  writing in sexual desire (1986)  rejected popper s arguments  pointing to the theory of repression as an example of a freudian theory that does have testable consequences. scruton nevertheless concluded that psychoanalysis is not genuinely scientific  on the grounds that it involves an unacceptable dependence on metaphor.cognitive scientists  in particular  have also weighed in. martin seligman  a prominent academic in positive psychology wrote   thirty years ago  the cognitive revolution in psychology overthrew both freud and the behaviorists  at least in academia. ... [t]hinking ... is not just a [result] of emotion or behavior. ... [e]motion is always generated by cognition  not the other way around.  linguist noam chomsky has criticized psychoanalysis for lacking a scientific basis. steven pinker considers freudian theory unscientific for understanding the mind. evolutionary biologist stephen jay gould considered psychoanalysis influenced by pseudoscientific theories such as recapitulation theory. psychologists hans
eysenck and john f. kihlstrom have also criticized the field as pseudoscience. adolf grünbaum argues in validation in the clinical theory of psychoanalysis (1993) that psychoanalytic based theories are falsifiable  but that the causal claims of psychoanalysis are unsupported by the available clinical evidence.richard feynman wrote off psychoanalysts as mere  witch doctors   if you look at all of the complicated ideas that they have developed in an infinitesimal amount of time  if you compare to any other of the sciences how long it takes to get one idea after the other  if you consider all the structures and inventions and complicated things  the ids and the egos  the tensions and the forces  and the pushes and the pulls  i tell you they can t all be there. it s too much for one brain or a few brains to have cooked up in such a short time. the psychiatrist e. fuller torrey  in witchdoctors and psychiatrists (1986)  agreed that psychoanalytic theories have no more scientific basis than the theories of traditional native healers   witchdoctors  or modern  cult  alternatives such as est. psychologist alice miller charged psychoanalysis with being similar to the poisonous pedagogies  which she described in her book for your own good. she scrutinized and rejected the validity of freud s drive theory  including the oedipus complex  which  according to her and jeffrey masson  blames the child for the abusive sexual behavior of adults. psychologist joel kupfersmid investigated the validity of the oedipus complex  examining its nature and origins. he concluded that there is little evidence to support the existence of the oedipus complex.michel foucault and gilles deleuze claimed that the institution of psychoanalysis has become a center of power and that its confessional techniques resemble the christian tradition. jacques lacan criticized the emphasis of some american and british psychoanalytical traditions on what he has viewed as the suggestion of imaginary  causes  for symptoms  and recommended the return to freud. together with deleuze  félix guattari criticised the oedipal structure. luce irigaray criticised psychoanalysis  employing jacques derrida s concept of phallogocentrism to describe the exclusion of the woman from freudian and lacanian psychoanalytical theories. deleuze and guattari  in their 1972 work anti-œdipus  take the cases of gérard mendel  bela grunberger and janine chasseguet-smirgel  prominent members of the most respected associations (ipa)  to suggest that  traditionally  psychoanalysis enthusiastically embraces a police state.the theoretical foundations of psychoanalysis lie in the same philosophical currents that lead to interpretive phenomenology rather than in those that lead to scientific positivism  making the theory largely incompatible with positivist approaches to the study of the mind.although numerous studies have shown that the efficacy of therapy is primarily related to the quality of the therapist  rather than the school or technique or training  a french 2004 report from inserm concluded that psychoanalytic therapy is less effective than other psychotherapies (including cognitive behavioral
therapy) for certain diseases. this report used a meta-analysis of numerous other studies to find whether the treatment was  proven  or  presumed  to be effective on different diseases.   === freudian theory ===  a survey of scientific research suggested that while personality traits corresponding to freud s oral  anal  oedipal  and genital phases can be observed  they do not necessarily manifest as stages in the development of children. these studies also have not confirmed that such traits in adults result from childhood experiences (fisher & greenberg  1977  399). however  these stages should not be viewed as crucial to modern psychoanalysis. what is crucial to modern psychoanalytic theory and practice is the power of the unconscious and the transference phenomenon.the idea of  unconscious  is contested because human behavior can be observed while human mental activity has to be inferred. however  the unconscious is now a popular topic of study in the fields of experimental and social psychology (e.g.  implicit attitude measures  fmri  and pet scans  and other indirect tests). the idea of unconscious  and the transference phenomenon  have been widely researched and  it is claimed  validated in the fields of cognitive psychology and social psychology (westen & gabbard 2002)  though a freudian interpretation of unconscious mental activity is not held by the majority of cognitive psychologists. recent developments in neuroscience have resulted in one side arguing that it has provided a biological basis for unconscious emotional processing in line with psychoanalytic theory i.e.  neuropsychoanalysis (westen & gabbard 2002)  while the other side argues that such findings make psychoanalytic theory obsolete and irrelevant. shlomo kalo explains that the scientific materialism that flourished in the 19th century severely harmed religion and rejected whatever called spiritual. the institution of the confession priest in particular was badly damaged. the empty void that this institution left behind was swiftly occupied by the newborn psychoanalysis. in his writings kalo claims that psychoanalysis basic approach is erroneous. it represents the mainline wrong assumptions that happiness is unreachable and that the natural desire of a human being is to exploit his fellow men for his own pleasure and benefit.jacques derrida incorporated aspects of psychoanalytic theory into his theory of deconstruction in order to question what he called the  metaphysics of presence .  derrida also turns some of these ideas against freud  to reveal tensions and contradictions in his work.  for example  although freud defines religion and metaphysics as displacements of the identification with the father in the resolution of the oedipal complex  derrida insists in the postcard  from socrates to freud and beyond that the prominence of the father in freud s own analysis is itself indebted to the prominence given to the father in western metaphysics and theology since plato.   == outlook == psychoanalysis continues to be practiced by psychiatrists  social workers  and other mental health professionals  however  its practice
has declined.in 2015 bradley peterson  a psychoanalyst  child psychiatrist and the director of the institute for the developing mind at children s hospital los angeles  said   i think most people would agree that psychoanalysis as a form of treatment is on its last legs . however psychoanalytic approaches continue to be listed by the uk nhs as possibly helpful for depression.   == see also == list of schools of psychoanalysis psychoanalytic sociology psychoanalysis and music training analysis   == notes ==   == references ==   == literature ==   === book series === contemporary psychoanalytic studies  rodopi  amsterdam/new york.   === analyses  discussions and critiques ===   === responses to critiques ===   == external links == international psychoanalytical association (ipa) – world s primary regulatory body for psychoanalysis  founded by sigmund freud psychoanalysis – division 39 – american psychological association
entrepreneurship is the process of designing  launching and running a new business  which is often initially a small business. the people who create these businesses are called entrepreneurs.entrepreneurship has been described as the  capacity and willingness to develop  organize and manage a business venture along with any of its risks to make a profit.  while definitions of entrepreneurship typically focus on the launching and running of businesses  due to the high risks involved in launching a start-up  a significant proportion of start-up businesses have to close due to  lack of funding  bad business decisions  an economic crisis  lack of market demand  or a combination of all of these. a broader definition of the term is sometimes used  especially in the field of economics. in this usage  an entrepreneur is an entity which has the ability to find and act upon opportunities to translate inventions or technologies into products and services   the entrepreneur is able to recognize the commercial potential of the invention and organize the capital  talent  and other resources that turn an invention into a commercially viable innovation.   in this sense  the term  entrepreneurship  also captures innovative activities on the part of established firms  in addition to similar activities on the part of new businesses.   == elements == entrepreneurship is  act of being an entrepreneur  or  the owner or manager of a business enterprise who  by risk and initiative  attempts to make profits . entrepreneurs act as managers and oversee the launch and growth of an enterprise. entrepreneurship is the process by which either an individual or a team identifies a business opportunity and acquires and deploys the necessary resources required for its exploitation. early-19th-century french economist jean-baptiste say provided a broad definition of entrepreneurship  saying that it  shifts economic resources out of an area of lower and into an area of higher productivity and greater yield . entrepreneurs create something new  something different—they change or transmute values. regardless of the firm size  big or small  they can partake in entrepreneurship opportunities. the opportunity to become an entrepreneur requires four criteria. first  there must be opportunities or situations to recombine resources to generate profit. second  entrepreneurship requires differences between people  such as preferential access to certain individuals or the ability to recognize information about opportunities. third  taking on risk is a necessity. fourth  the entrepreneurial process requires the organization of people and resources.the entrepreneur is a factor in and the study of entrepreneurship reaches back to the work of richard cantillon and adam smith in the late 17th and early 18th centuries. however  entrepreneurship was largely ignored theoretically until the late 19th and early 20th centuries and empirically until a profound resurgence in business and economics since the late 1970s. in the 20th century  the understanding of entrepreneurship owes much to the work of economist joseph schumpeter in
the 1930s and other austrian economists such as carl menger  ludwig von mises and friedrich von hayek. according to schumpeter  an entrepreneur is a person who is willing and able to convert a new idea or invention into a successful innovation. entrepreneurship employs what schumpeter called  the gale of creative destruction  to replace in whole or in part inferior innovations across markets and industries  simultaneously creating new products including new business models. in this way  creative destruction is largely responsible for the dynamism of industries and long-run economic growth. the supposition that entrepreneurship leads to economic growth is an interpretation of the residual in endogenous growth theory and as such is hotly debated in academic economics. an alternative description posited by israel kirzner suggests that the majority of innovations may be much more incremental improvements such as the replacement of paper with plastic in the making of drinking straws. the exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunities may include  developing a business plan hiring the human resources acquiring financial and material resources providing leadership being responsible for both the venture s success or failure risk aversioneconomist joseph schumpeter (1883–1950) saw the role of the entrepreneur in the economy as  creative destruction  – launching innovations that simultaneously destroy old industries while ushering in new industries and approaches. for schumpeter  the changes and  dynamic disequilibrium brought on by the innovating entrepreneur [were] the norm of a healthy economy . while entrepreneurship is often associated with new  small  for-profit start-ups  entrepreneurial behavior can be seen in small-  medium- and large-sized firms  new and established firms and in for-profit and not-for-profit organizations  including voluntary-sector groups  charitable organizations and government.entrepreneurship may operate within an entrepreneurship ecosystem which often includes   government programs and services that promote entrepreneurship and support entrepreneurs and start-ups non-governmental organizations such as small-business associations and organizations that offer advice and mentoring to entrepreneurs (e.g. through entrepreneurship centers or websites) small-business advocacy organizations that lobby governments for increased support for entrepreneurship programs and more small business-friendly laws and regulations entrepreneurship resources and facilities (e.g. business incubators and seed accelerators) entrepreneurship education and training programs offered by schools  colleges and universities financing (e.g. bank loans  venture capital financing  angel investing and government and private foundation grants)in the 2000s  usage of the term  entrepreneurship  expanded to include how and why some individuals (or teams) identify opportunities  evaluate them as viable  and then decide to exploit them. the term has also been used to discuss how people might use these opportunities to develop new products or services  launch new firms or industries  and create wealth. the entrepreneurial process is uncertain because opportunities can only be identified after they have been exploited.entrepreneurs exhibit positive biases towards finding new possibilities and seeing unmet market needs  and a tendency towards risk-taking that makes them more likely to exploit business opportunities.   == history ==   === historical usage ===  
entrepreneur  ( (listen)  uk also ) is a loanword from french. the word first appeared in the french dictionary entitled dictionnaire universel de commerce compiled by jacques des bruslons and published in 1723. especially in britain  the term  adventurer  was often used to denote the same meaning. the study of entrepreneurship reaches back to the work in the late 17th and early 18th centuries of irish-french economist richard cantillon  which was foundational to classical economics. cantillon defined the term first in his essai sur la nature du commerce en général  or essay on the nature of trade in general  a book william stanley jevons considered the  cradle of political economy . cantillon defined the term as a person who pays a certain price for a product and resells it at an uncertain price   making decisions about obtaining and using the resources while consequently admitting the risk of enterprise . cantillon considered the entrepreneur to be a risk taker who deliberately allocates resources to exploit opportunities to maximize the financial return. cantillon emphasized the willingness of the entrepreneur to assume the risk and to deal with uncertainty  thus he drew attention to the function of the entrepreneur and distinguished between the function of the entrepreneur and the owner who provided the money.jean-baptiste say also identified entrepreneurs as a driver for economic development  emphasizing their role as one of the collecting factors of production allocating resources from less to fields that are more productive. both say and cantillon belonged to french school of thought and known as the physiocrats.dating back to the time of the medieval guilds in germany  a craftsperson required special permission to operate as an entrepreneur  the small proof of competence (kleiner befähigungsnachweis)  which restricted training of apprentices to craftspeople who held a meister certificate. this institution was introduced in 1908 after a period of so-called freedom of trade (gewerbefreiheit  introduced in 1871) in the german reich. however  proof of competence was not required to start a business. in 1935 and in 1953  greater proof of competence was reintroduced (großer befähigungsnachweis kuhlenbeck)  which required craftspeople to obtain a meister apprentice-training certificate before being permitted to set up a new business.   === 20th century === in the 20th century  entrepreneurship was studied by joseph schumpeter in the 1930s and other austrian economists such as carl menger  ludwig von mises and friedrich von hayek. while the loan from french of the word  entrepreneur  dates to the 1850  the term  entrepreneurship  was coined around the 1920s. according to schumpeter  an entrepreneur is willing and able to convert a new idea or invention into a successful innovation. entrepreneurship employs what schumpeter called  the gale of creative destruction  to replace in whole or in part inferior offerings across markets and industries  simultaneously creating new products and new business models  thus creative destruction is largely responsible for long-term economic growth. the idea that
entrepreneurship leads to economic growth is an interpretation of the residual in endogenous growth theory and as such continues to be debated in academic economics. an alternative description by israel kirzner suggests that the majority of innovations may be incremental improvements such as the replacement of paper with plastic in the construction of a drinking straw that require no special qualities. for schumpeter  entrepreneurship resulted in new industries and in new combinations of currently existing inputs. schumpeter s initial example of this was the combination of a steam engine and then current wagon making technologies to produce the horseless carriage. in this case  the innovation (i.e. the car) was transformational  but did not require the development of dramatic new technology. it did not immediately replace the horse-drawn carriage  but in time incremental improvements reduced the cost and improved the technology  leading to the modern auto industry. despite schumpeter s early 20th-century contributions  the traditional microeconomic theory did not formally consider the entrepreneur in its theoretical frameworks (instead of assuming that resources would find each other through a price system). in this treatment  the entrepreneur was an implied but unspecified actor  consistent with the concept of the entrepreneur being the agent of x-efficiency. for schumpeter  the entrepreneur did not bear risk  the capitalist did. schumpeter believed that the equilibrium was imperfect. schumpeter (1934) demonstrated that the changing environment continuously provides new information about the optimum allocation of resources to enhance profitability. some individuals acquire the new information before others and recombine the resources to gain an entrepreneurial profit. schumpeter was of the opinion that entrepreneurs shift the production possibility curve to a higher level using innovations.initially  economists made the first attempt to study the entrepreneurship concept in depth. alfred marshall viewed the entrepreneur as a multi-tasking capitalist and observed that in the equilibrium of a completely competitive market there was no spot for  entrepreneurs  as an economic activity creator.   === 21st century ===  in the 2000s  entrepreneurship has been extended from its origins in for-profit businesses to include social entrepreneurship  in which business goals are sought alongside social  environmental or humanitarian goals and even the concept of the political entrepreneur. entrepreneurship within an existing firm or large organization has been referred to as intrapreneurship and may include corporate ventures where large entities  spin-off  subsidiary organizations.entrepreneurs are leaders willing to take risk and exercise initiative  taking advantage of market opportunities by planning  organizing and deploying resources  often by innovating to create new or improving existing products or services. in the 2000s  the term  entrepreneurship  has been extended to include a specific mindset resulting in entrepreneurial initiatives  e.g. in the form of social entrepreneurship  political entrepreneurship or knowledge entrepreneurship. according to paul reynolds  founder of the global entrepreneurship monitor   by the time they reach their retirement years  half of all working men in the united states probably have a period of self-employment
of one or more years  one in four may have engaged in self-employment for six or more years. participating in a new business creation is a common activity among u.s. workers over the course of their careers . in recent years  entrepreneurship has been claimed as a major driver of economic growth in both the united states and western europe. entrepreneurial activities differ substantially depending on the type of organization and creativity involved. entrepreneurship ranges in scale from solo  part-time projects to large-scale undertakings that involve a team and which may create many jobs. many  high value  entrepreneurial ventures seek venture capital or angel funding (seed money) to raise capital for building and expanding the business. many organizations exist to support would-be entrepreneurs  including specialized government agencies  business incubators (which may be for-profit  non-profit  or operated by a college or university)  science parks and non-governmental organizations  which include a range of organizations including not-for-profits  charities  foundations and business advocacy groups (e.g. chambers of commerce). beginning in 2008  an annual  global entrepreneurship week  event aimed at  exposing people to the benefits of entrepreneurship  and getting them to  participate in entrepreneurial-related activities  was launched.   === relationship between small business and entrepreneurship === the term  entrepreneur  is often conflated with the term  small business  or used interchangeably with this term. while most entrepreneurial ventures start out as a small business  not all small businesses are entrepreneurial in the strict sense of the term. many small businesses are sole proprietor operations consisting solely of the owner—or they have a small number of employees—and many of these small businesses offer an existing product  process or service and they do not aim at growth. in contrast  entrepreneurial ventures offer an innovative product  process or service and the entrepreneur typically aims to scale up the company by adding employees  seeking international sales and so on  a process which is financed by venture capital and angel investments. in this way  the term  entrepreneur  may be more closely associated with the term  startup . successful entrepreneurs have the ability to lead a business in a positive direction by proper planning  to adapt to changing environments and understand their own strengths and weakness.   === historians  ranking === a 2002 survey of 58 business history professors gave the top spots in american business history to  henry ford  followed by bill gates  john d. rockefeller  andrew carnegie  and thomas edison.  they were followed by sam walton  j. p. morgan  alfred p. sloan  walt disney  ray kroc  thomas j. watson  alexander graham bell  eli whitney  james j. hill  jack welch  cyrus mccormick  david packard  bill hewlett   cornelius vanderbilt  and george westinghouse.   a 1977 survey of management scholars reported the top five pioneers
in management ideas were  frederick winslow taylor  chester barnard  frank bunker gilbreth sr.  elton mayo  and lillian moller gilbreth.   == types of entrepreneurs ==   === ethnic === the term  ethnic entrepreneurship  refers to self-employed business owners who belong to racial or ethnic minority groups in the united states and europe. a long tradition of academic research explores the experiences and strategies of ethnic entrepreneurs as they strive to integrate economically into mainstream u.s. or european society. classic cases include jewish merchants and tradespeople in large u.s. cities in the 19th and early 20th centuries as well as chinese and japanese small business owners (restaurants  farmers  shop owners) on the west coast. in the 2010s  ethnic entrepreneurship has been studied in the case of cuban business owners in miami  indian motel owners of the u.s. and chinese business owners in chinatowns across the united states. while entrepreneurship offers these groups many opportunities for economic advancement  self-employment and business ownership in the united states remain unevenly distributed along racial/ethnic lines. despite numerous success stories of asian entrepreneurs  a recent statistical analysis of u.s. census data shows that whites are more likely than asians  african-americans and latinos to be self-employed in high prestige  lucrative industries.   === institutional === the american-born british economist edith penrose has highlighted the collective nature of entrepreneurship. she mentions that in modern organizations  human resources need to be combined to better capture and create business opportunities. the sociologist paul dimaggio (1988 14) has expanded this view to say that  new institutions arise when organized actors with sufficient resources [institutional entrepreneurs] see in them an opportunity to realize interests that they value highly . the notion has been widely applied.   === cultural === according to christopher rea and nicolai volland  cultural entrepreneurship is  practices of individual and collective agency characterized by mobility between cultural professions and modes of cultural production  which refers to creative industry activities and sectors. in their book the business of culture (2015)  rea and volland identify three types of cultural entrepreneur   cultural personalities  defined as  individuals who buil[d] their own personal brand of creativity as a cultural authority and leverage it to create and sustain various cultural enterprises   tycoons  defined as  entrepreneurs who buil[d] substantial clout in the cultural sphere by forging synergies between their industrial  cultural  political  and philanthropic interests  and  collective enterprises  organizations which may engage in cultural production for profit or not-for-profit purposes.   === feminist === a feminist entrepreneur is an individual who applies feminist values and approaches through entrepreneurship  with the goal of improving the quality of life and well-being of girls and women. many are doing so by creating  for women  by women  enterprises. feminist entrepreneurs are motivated to enter commercial markets by desire to create wealth and social change  based on the
ethics of cooperation  equality and mutual respect.   === social ===  social entrepreneurship is the use of the by start up companies and other entrepreneurs to develop  fund and implement solutions to social  cultural  or environmental issues. this concept may be applied to a variety of organizations with different sizes  aims  and beliefs. for-profit entrepreneurs typically measure performance using business metrics like profit  revenues and increases in stock prices  but social entrepreneurs are either non-profits or blend for-profit goals with generating a positive  return to society  and therefore must use different metrics. social entrepreneurship typically attempts to further broad social  cultural  and environmental goals often associated with the voluntary sector in areas such as poverty alleviation  health care and community development. at times  profit-making social enterprises may be established to support the social or cultural goals of the organization but not as an end in itself. for example  an organization that aims to provide housing and employment to the homeless may operate a restaurant  both to raise money and to provide employment for the homeless people.   === nascent === a nascent entrepreneur is someone in the process of establishing a business venture. in this observation  the nascent entrepreneur can be seen as pursuing an opportunity  i.e. a possibility to introduce new services or products  serve new markets  or develop more efficient production methods in a profitable manner. but before such a venture is actually established  the opportunity is just a venture idea. in other words  the pursued opportunity is perceptual in nature  propped by the nascent entrepreneur s personal beliefs about the feasibility of the venturing outcomes the nascent entrepreneur seeks to achieve. its prescience and value cannot be confirmed ex ante but only gradually  in the context of the actions that the nascent entrepreneur undertakes towards establishing the venture  ultimately  these actions can lead to a path that the nascent entrepreneur deems no longer attractive or feasible  or result in the emergence of a (viable) business. in this sense  over time  the nascent venture can move towards being discontinued or towards emerging successfully as an operating entity. the distinction between the novice  serial and portfolio entrepreneurs is an example of behavior-based categorization. other examples are the (related) studies by  on start-up event sequences.  nascent entrepreneurship that emphasizes the series of activities involved in new venture emergence  rather than the solitary act of exploiting an opportunity. such research will help separate entrepreneurial action into its basic sub-activities and elucidate the inter- relationships between activities  between an activity (or sequence of activities) and an individual s motivation to form an opportunity belief  and between an activity (or sequence of activities) and the knowledge needed to form an opportunity belief. with this research  scholars will be able to begin constructing a theory of the micro-foundations of entrepreneurial action. scholars interested in nascent entrepreneurship tend
to focus less on the single act of opportunity exploitation and more on the series of actions in new venture emergence . indeed  nascent entrepreneurs undertake numerous entrepreneurial activities  including actions that make their businesses more concrete to themselves and others. for instance  nascent entrepreneurs often look for and purchase facilities and equipment  seek and obtain financial backing  form legal entities  organize teams  and dedicate all their time and energy to their business   === project-based === project entrepreneurs are individuals who are engaged in the repeated assembly or creation of temporary organizations. these are organizations that have limited lifespans which are devoted to producing a singular objective or goal and get disbanded rapidly when the project ends. industries where project-based enterprises are widespread include  sound recording  film production  software development  television production  new media and construction. what makes project-entrepreneurs distinctive from a theoretical standpoint is that they have to  rewire  these temporary ventures and modify them to suit the needs of new project opportunities that emerge. a project entrepreneur who used a certain approach and team for one project may have to modify the business model or team for a subsequent project. project entrepreneurs are exposed repeatedly to problems and tasks typical of the entrepreneurial process. indeed  project-entrepreneurs face two critical challenges that invariably characterize the creation of a new venture  locating the right opportunity to launch the project venture and assembling the most appropriate team to exploit that opportunity. resolving the first challenge requires project-entrepreneurs to access an extensive range of information needed to seize new investment opportunities. resolving the second challenge requires assembling a collaborative team that has to fit well with the particular challenges of the project and has to function almost immediately to reduce the risk that performance might be adversely affected. another type of project entrepreneurship involves entrepreneurs working with business students to get analytical work done on their ideas.   === millennial === the term  millennial entrepreneur  refers to a business owner who is affiliated with the generation that was brought up using digital technology and mass media—the products of baby boomers  those people born during the 1980s and early 1990s. also known as generation y  these business owners are well equipped with knowledge of new technology and new business models and have a strong grasp of its business applications. there have been many breakthrough businesses that have come from millennial entrepreneurs such as mark zuckerberg  who created facebook. despite the expectation of millennial success  there have been recent studies that have proven this to not be the case.  the comparison between millennials who are self-employed and those who are not self-employed shows that the latter is higher. the reason for this is because they have grown up in a different generation and attitude than their elders. some of the barriers to entry for entrepreneurs are the economy  debt from schooling and the challenges of regulatory compliance.  
== entrepreneurial behaviors == the entrepreneur is commonly seen as an innovator—a designer of new ideas and business processes. management skills and strong team building abilities are often perceived as essential leadership attributes for successful entrepreneurs. political economist robert reich considers leadership  management ability and team-building to be essential qualities of an entrepreneur.   === uncertainty perception and risk-taking === theorists frank knight and peter drucker defined entrepreneurship in terms of risk-taking. the entrepreneur is willing to put his or her career and financial security on the line and take risks in the name of an idea  spending time as well as capital on an uncertain venture. however  entrepreneurs often do not believe that they have taken an enormous amount of risks because they do not perceive the level of uncertainty to be as high as other people do. knight classified three types of uncertainty   risk  which is measurable statistically (such as the probability of drawing a red color ball from a jar containing five red balls and five white balls) ambiguity  which is hard to measure statistically (such as the probability of drawing a red ball from a jar containing five red balls but an unknown number of white balls) true uncertainty or knightian uncertainty  which is impossible to estimate or predict statistically (such as the probability of drawing a red ball from a jar whose contents  in terms of numbers of coloured balls  are entirely unknown) entrepreneurship is often associated with true uncertainty  particularly when it involves the creation of a novel good or service  for a market that did not previously exist  rather than when a venture creates an incremental improvement to an existing product or service. a 2014 study at eth zürich found that compared with typical managers  entrepreneurs showed higher decision-making efficiency and a stronger activation in regions of frontopolar cortex (fpc) previously associated with explorative choice.   ===  coachability  and advice taking === the ability of entrepreneurs to work closely with and take advice from early investors and other partners (i.e. their coachability) has long been considered a critical factor in entrepreneurial success. at the same time  economists have argued that entrepreneurs should not simply act on all advice given to them  even when that advice comes from well-informed sources  because entrepreneurs possess far deeper and richer local knowledge about their own firm than any outsider. indeed  measures of coachability are not actually predictive of entrepreneurial success (e.g. measured as success in subsequent funding rounds  acquisitions  pivots and firm survival). this research also shows that older and larger founding teams  presumably those with more subject expertise  are less coachable than younger and smaller founding teams.   === strategies === strategies that entrepreneurs may use include   innovation of new products  services or processes continuous process improvement (cpi) exploration of new business models use of technology use of business intelligence use of economical strategics development of future products
and services optimized talent management   === designing individual/opportunity nexus === according to shane and venkataraman  entrepreneurship comprises both  enterprising individuals  and  entrepreneurial opportunities  so researchers should study the nature of the individuals who identify opportunities when others do not  the opportunities themselves and the nexus between individuals and opportunities. on the other hand  reynolds et al. argue that individuals are motivated to engage in entrepreneurial endeavors driven mainly by necessity or opportunity  that is individuals pursue entrepreneurship primarily owing to survival needs  or because they identify business opportunities that satisfy their need for achievement. for example  higher economic inequality tends to increase necessity-based entrepreneurship rates at the individual level.   === opportunity perception and biases === the ability of entrepreneurs to innovate relates to innate traits  including extroversion and a proclivity for risk-taking. according to joseph schumpeter  the capabilities of innovating  introducing new technologies  increasing efficiency and productivity  or generating new products or services  are characteristic qualities of entrepreneurs. one study has found that certain genes affecting personality may influence the income of self-employed people. some people may be able to use  an innate ability  or quasi-statistical sense to gauge public opinion and market demand for new products or services. entrepreneurs tend to have the ability to see unmet market needs and underserved markets. while some entrepreneurs assume they can sense and figure out what others are thinking  the mass media plays a crucial role in shaping views and demand. ramoglou argues that entrepreneurs are not that distinctive and that it is essentially poor conceptualizations of  non-entrepreneurs  that maintain laudatory portraits of  entrepreneurs  as exceptional innovators or leaders  entrepreneurs are often overconfident  exhibit illusion of control  when they are opening/expanding business or new products/services.   === styles === differences in entrepreneurial organizations often partially reflect their founders  heterogenous identities. fauchart and gruber have classified entrepreneurs into three main types  darwinians  communitarians and missionaries. these types of entrepreneurs diverge in fundamental ways in their self-views  social motivations and patterns of new firm creation.   === communication === entrepreneurs need to practice effective communication both within their firm and with external partners and investors to launch and grow a venture and enable it to survive. an entrepreneur needs a communication system that links the staff of her firm and connects the firm to outside firms and clients. entrepreneurs should be charismatic leaders  so they can communicate a vision effectively to their team and help to create a strong team. communicating a vision to followers may be well the most important act of the transformational leader. compelling visions provide employees with a sense of purpose and encourage commitment. according to baum et al. and kouzes and posner  the vision must be communicated through written statements and through in-person communication. entrepreneurial leaders must speak and listen to articulate their vision to others.communication is pivotal in the role of entrepreneurship
because it enables leaders to convince potential investors  partners and employees about the feasibility of a venture. entrepreneurs need to communicate effectively to shareholders. nonverbal elements in speech such as the tone of voice  the look in the sender s eyes  body language  hand gestures and state of emotions are also important communication tools. the communication accommodation theory posits that throughout communication people will attempt to accommodate or adjust their method of speaking to others. face negotiation theory describes how people from different cultures manage conflict negotiation to maintain  face . hugh rank s  intensify and downplay  communications model can be used by entrepreneurs who are developing a new product or service. rank argues that entrepreneurs need to be able to intensify the advantages of their new product or service and downplay the disadvantages to persuade others to support their venture.   ==== links to sea piracy ==== research from 2014 found links between entrepreneurship and historical sea piracy. in this context  the claim is made for a non-moral approach to looking at the history of piracy as a source of inspiration for entrepreneurship education as well as for research in entrepreneurship and business model generation.   == psychological makeup ==  stanford university economist edward lazear found in a 2005 study that variety in education and work experience was the most important trait that distinguished entrepreneurs from non-entrepreneurs a 2013 study by uschi backes-gellner of the university of zurich and petra moog of the university of siegen in germany found that a diverse social network was also important in distinguishing students that would go on to become entrepreneurs.studies show that the psychological propensities for male and female entrepreneurs are more similar than different. empirical studies suggest that female entrepreneurs possess strong negotiating skills and consensus-forming abilities. asa hansson  who looked at empirical evidence from sweden  found that the probability of becoming self-employed decreases with age for women  but increases with age for men. she also found that marriage increased the probability of a person becoming an entrepreneur.jesper sørensen wrote that significant influences on the decision to become an entrepreneur are workplace peers and social composition. sørensen discovered a correlation between working with former entrepreneurs and how often these individuals become entrepreneurs themselves  compared to those who did not work with entrepreneurs. social composition can influence entrepreneurialism in peers by demonstrating the possibility for success  stimulating a  he can do it  why can t i  attitude. as sørensen stated   when you meet others who have gone out on their own  it doesn t seem that crazy .entrepreneurs may also be driven to entrepreneurship by past experiences. if they have faced multiple work stoppages or have been unemployed in the past  the probability of them becoming an entrepreneur increases per cattell s personality framework  both personality traits and attitudes are thoroughly investigated by psychologists. however  in case of entrepreneurship research these notions are employed by academics too  but
vaguely. according to cattell  personality is a system that is related to the environment and further adds that the system seeks explanation to the complex transactions conducted by both—traits and attitudes. this is because both of them bring about change and growth in a person. personality is that which informs what an individual will do when faced with a given situation. a person s response is triggered by his/her personality and the situation that is faced.innovative entrepreneurs may be more likely to experience what psychologist mihaly csikszentmihalyi calls  flow .  flow  occurs when an individual forgets about the outside world due to being thoroughly engaged in a process or activity. csikszentmihalyi suggested that breakthrough innovations tend to occur at the hands of individuals in that state. other research has concluded that a strong internal motivation is a vital ingredient for breakthrough innovation. flow can be compared to maria montessori s concept of normalization  a state that includes a child s capacity for joyful and lengthy periods of intense concentration. csikszentmihalyi acknowledged that montessori s prepared environment offers children opportunities to achieve flow. thus quality and type of early education may influence entrepreneurial capability. research on high-risk settings such as oil platforms  investment banking  medical surgery  aircraft piloting and nuclear power plants has related distrust to failure avoidance. when non-routine strategies are needed  distrusting persons perform better while when routine strategies are needed trusting persons perform better. this research was extended to entrepreneurial firms by gudmundsson and lechner. they argued that in entrepreneurial firms the threat of failure is ever present resembling non-routine situations in high-risk settings. they found that the firms of distrusting entrepreneurs were more likely to survive than the firms of optimistic or overconfident entrepreneurs. the reasons were that distrusting entrepreneurs would emphasize failure avoidance through sensible task selection and more analysis. kets de vries has pointed out that distrusting entrepreneurs are more alert about their external environment. he concluded that distrusting entrepreneurs are less likely to discount negative events and are more likely to engage control mechanisms. similarly  gudmundsson and lechner found that distrust leads to higher precaution and therefore increases chances of entrepreneurial firm survival. researchers schoon and duckworth completed a study in 2012 that could potentially help identify who may become an entrepreneur at an early age. they determined that the best measures to identify a young entrepreneur are family and social status  parental role modeling  entrepreneurial competencies at age 10  academic attainment at age 10  generalized self-efficacy  social skills  entrepreneurial intention and experience of unemployment.   === strategic === some scholars have constructed an operational definition of a more specific subcategory called  strategic entrepreneurship . closely tied with principles of strategic management  this form of entrepreneurship is  concerned about growth  creating value for customers and subsequently creating wealth for owners . a 2011 article for the academy of management provided a three-step   input-process-output  model of strategic entrepreneurship. the model s three steps
entail the collection of different resources  the process of orchestrating them in the necessary manner and the subsequent creation of competitive advantage  value for customers  wealth and other benefits. through the proper use of strategic management/leadership techniques and the implementation of risk-bearing entrepreneurial thinking  the strategic entrepreneur is therefore able to align resources to create value and wealth.   === leadership === leadership in entrepreneurship can be defined as  process of social influence in which one person can enlist the aid and support of others in the accomplishment of a common task  in  one who undertakes innovations  finance and business acumen in an effort to transform innovations into economic goods . this refers to not only the act of entrepreneurship as managing or starting a business  but how one manages to do so by these social processes  or leadership skills. entrepreneurship in itself can be defined as  the process by which individuals  teams  or organizations identify and pursue entrepreneurial opportunities without being immediately constrained by the resources they currently control . an entrepreneur typically has a mindset that seeks out potential opportunities during uncertain times. an entrepreneur must have leadership skills or qualities  to see potential opportunities and act upon them. at the core  an entrepreneur is a decision maker. such decisions often affect an organization as a whole  which is representative of their leadership amongst the organization. with the growing global market and increasing technology use throughout all industries  the core of entrepreneurship and the decision-making has become an ongoing process rather than isolated incidents. this becomes knowledge management which is  identifying and harnessing intellectual assets  for organizations to  build on past experiences and create new mechanisms for exchanging and creating knowledge . this belief draws upon a leader s past experiences that may prove useful. it is a common mantra for one to learn from their past mistakes  so leaders should take advantage of their failures for their benefit. this is how one may take their experiences as a leader for the use in the core of entrepreneurship-decision making.   === global leadership === the majority of scholarly research done on these topics have been from north america. words like  leadership  and  entrepreneurship  do not always translate well into other cultures and languages. for example  in north america a leader is often thought to be charismatic  but german culture frowns on such charisma due to the charisma of nazi leader adolf hitler. other cultures  like some european countries  view the term  leader  negatively  like the french. the participative leadership style that is encouraged in the united states is considered disrespectful in many other parts of the world due to the differences in power distance. many asian and middle eastern countries do not have  open door  policies for subordinates and would never informally approach their managers/bosses. for countries like that  an authoritarian approach to
management and leadership is more customary. despite cultural differences  the successes and failures of entrepreneurs can be traced to how leaders adapt to local conditions. with the increasingly global business environment a successful leader must be able to adapt and have insight into other cultures. to respond to the environment  corporate visions are becoming transnational in nature  to enable the organization to operate in or provide services/goods for other cultures.   == entrepreneurship training and education == michelacci and schivardi are a pair of researchers who believe that identifying and comparing the relationships between an entrepreneur s earnings and education level would determine the rate and level of success. their study focused on two education levels  college degree and post-graduate degree. while michelacci and schivardi do not specifically determine characteristics or traits for successful entrepreneurs  they do believe that there is a direct relationship between education and success  noting that having a college knowledge does contribute to advancement in the workforce. michelacci and schivardi state there has been a rise in the number of self-employed people with a baccalaureate degree. however  their findings also show that those who are self-employed and possess a graduate degree has remained consistent throughout time at about 33 percent. they briefly mention those famous entrepreneurs like steve jobs and mark zuckerberg who were college dropouts  but they call these cases all but exceptional as it is a pattern that many entrepreneurs view formal education as costly  mainly because of the time that needs to be spent on it. michelacci and schivardi believe that in order for an individual to reach the full success they need to have education beyond high school. their research shows that the higher the education level the greater the success. the reason is that college gives people additional skills that can be used within their business and to operate on a higher level than someone who only  runs  it.   == resources and financing ==   === entrepreneurial resources === an entrepreneurial resource is any company-owned asset that has economic value creating capabilities. economic value creating both tangible and intangible sources are considered as entrepreneurial resources. their economic value is generating activities or services through mobilization by entrepreneurs. entrepreneurial resources can be divided into two fundamental categories  tangible and intangible resources.tangible resources are material sources such as equipment  building  furniture  land  vehicle  machinery  stock  cash  bond and inventory that has a physical form and can be quantified. on the contrary  intangible resources are nonphysical or more challenging to identify and evaluate  and they possess more value creating capacity such as human resources including skills and experience in a particular field  organizational structure of the company  brand name  reputation  entrepreneurial networks that contribute to promotion and financial support  know-how  intellectual property including both copyrights  trademarks and patents.   === bootstrapping === at least early on  entrepreneurs often  bootstrap-finance 
their start-up rather than seeking external investors from the start. one of the reasons that some entrepreneurs prefer to  bootstrap  is that obtaining equity financing requires the entrepreneur to provide ownership shares to the investors. if the start-up becomes successful later on  these early equity financing deals could provide a windfall for the investors and a huge loss for the entrepreneur. if investors have a significant stake in the company  they may as well be able to exert influence on company strategy  chief executive officer (ceo) choice and other important decisions. this is often problematic since the investor and the founder might have different incentives regarding the long-term goal of the company. an investor will generally aim for a profitable exit and therefore promotes a high-valuation sale of the company or ipo to sell their shares. whereas the entrepreneur might have philanthropic intentions as their main driving force. soft values like this might not go well with the short-term pressure on yearly and quarterly profits that publicly traded companies often experience from their owners. one consensus definition of bootstrapping sees it as  a collection of methods used to minimize the amount of outside debt and equity financing needed from banks and investors . the majority of businesses require less than $10 000 to launch  which means that personal savings are most often used to start. in addition  bootstrapping entrepreneurs often incur personal credit-card debt  but they also can utilize a wide variety of methods. while bootstrapping involves increased personal financial risk for entrepreneurs  the absence of any other stakeholder gives the entrepreneur more freedom to develop the company. bootstrapping methods include  owner financing  including savings  personal loans and credit card debt working capital management that minimizes accounts receivable joint utilization  such as reducing overhead by coworking or using independent contractors increasing accounts payable by delaying payment  or leasing rather than buying equipment lean manufacturing strategies such as minimizing inventory and lean startup to reduce product development costs subsidy finance   === additional financing === many businesses need more capital than can be provided by the owners themselves. in this case  a range of options is available including a wide variety of private and public equity  debt and grants. private equity options include   startup accelerators angel investors venture capital investors equity crowdfunding hedge fundsdebt options open to entrepreneurs include   loans from banks  financial technology companies and economic development organizations line of credit also from banks and financial technology companies microcredit also known as microloans merchant cash advance revenue-based financinggrant options open to entrepreneurs include   equity-free accelerators business plan/business pitch competitions for college entrepreneurs and others small business innovation research grants from the u.s. government   === effect of taxes === entrepreneurs are faced with liquidity constraints and often lack the necessary credit needed to borrow large amounts of money to finance their venture. because of this  many studies have been done on the effects of taxes
on entrepreneurs. the studies fall into two camps  the first camp finds that taxes help and the second argues that taxes hurt entrepreneurship. cesaire assah meh found that corporate taxes create an incentive to become an entrepreneur to avoid double taxation. donald bruce and john deskins found literature suggesting that a higher corporate tax rate may reduce a state s share of entrepreneurs. they also found that states with an inheritance or estate tax tend to have lower entrepreneurship rates when using a tax-based measure. however  another study found that states with a more progressive personal income tax have a higher percentage of sole proprietors in their workforce. ultimately  many studies find that the effect of taxes on the probability of becoming an entrepreneur is small. donald bruce and mohammed mohsin found that it would take a 50 percentage point drop in the top tax rate to produce a one percent change in entrepreneurial activity.   == predictors of success ==  factors that may predict entrepreneurial success include the following  methodsestablishing strategies for the firm  including growth and survival strategies maintaining the human resources (recruiting and retaining talented employees and executives) ensuring the availability of required materials (e.g. raw resources used in manufacturing  computer chips  etc.) ensuring that the firm has one or more unique competitive advantages ensuring good organizational design  sound governance and organizational coordination congruency with the culture of the societymarketbusiness-to-business (b2b) or business-to-consumer (b2c) models can be used high growth market target customers or markets that are untapped or missed by othersindustrygrowing industry high technology impact on the industry high capital intensity small average incumbent firm sizeteamlarge  gender-diverse and racially diverse team with a range of talents  rather than an individual entrepreneur graduate degrees management experience prior to start-up work experience in the start-up industry employed full-time prior to new venture as opposed to unemployed prior entrepreneurial experience full-time involvement in the new venture motivated by a range of goals  not just profit number and diversity of team members  social ties and breadth of their business networkscompanywritten business plan focus on a unified  connected product line or service line competition based on a dimension other than price (e.g. quality or service) early  frequent intense and well-targeted marketing tight financial controls sufficient start-up and growth capital corporation model  not sole proprietorshipstatuswealth can enable an entrepreneur to cover start-up costs and deal with cash flow challenges dominant race  ethnicity or gender in a socially stratified culture   == see also ==   entrepreneurship – wikipedia book   == references ==   == bibliography == deakins  d.  freel  m. s. (2009).  entrepreneurial activity  the economy and the importance of small firms . entrepreneurship and small firms. mcgraw-hill education. isbn 978-0-07-712162-4. miller  k. (2005). communication theories  perspectives  processes  and contexts (2nd ed.). new york  ny  mcgraw-hill. scheufele  d.  moy  p. (2000).  twenty-five years of the spiral
of silence  a conceptual review and empirical outlook . international journal of public opinion research. 12 (1)  3–28. doi 10.1093/ijpor/12.1.3. issn 0954-2892.   == further reading == blackburn  robert (2008). small business and entrepreneurship. doi 10.4135/9781446263433. isbn 9781412934374. bowman  erik (july 2011). entrepreneur training manual  third edition  certified entrepreneur workbook. guanzi institute press. isbn 978-0-9837862-9-0. bruder  jessica (september 2013).  the psychological price of entrepreneurship.  inc. (winner 2014 annual awards contest of the deadline club) dana  leo paul 2010   nunavik  arctic quebec  where co-operatives supplement entrepreneurship  global business and economics review 12 (1/2)  january 2010  pp. 42–71. duening  thomas n.  hisrich  robert a.  lechter  michael a. (21 october 2009). technology entrepreneurship  creating  capturing  and protecting value. academic press. isbn 978-0-08-092288-1. foo  m.d. (2011).  emotions and entrepreneurial opportunity evaluation . entrepreneurship theory and practice. 35 (2)  375–393. doi 10.1111/j.1540-6520.2009.00357.x. folsom jr.   burton w. the myth of the robber barons (4th ed. 2003) james w. halloran. (2014). your small business adventure  finding your niche and growing a successful business. ala/huron street press. isbn 978-1-937589-44-8. leitão  joão  baptista  rui (10 june 2009). public policies for fostering entrepreneurship  a european perspective. springer science business media. isbn 978-1-4419-0249-8. lowe  robin  sue marriott (june 2006). enterprise  entrepreneurship and innovation  concepts  contexts and commercialization. butterworth-heinemann. isbn 978-0750669207. lundstrom  anders  stevenson  lois a. (30 march 2005). entrepreneurship policy  theory and practice. springer. isbn 978-0-387-24140-1. mccormick  blaine  and burton w. folsom.  a survey of business historians on america s greatest entrepreneurs.  business history review 77.4 (2003)  703-716. online minniti  m.  moren  l. (2010).  entrepreneurial types and economic growth . journal of business venturing. 25 (3)  305–314. doi 10.1016/j.jbusvent.2008.10.002. rea  christopher  volland  nicolai (2015). the business of culture  cultural entrepreneurs in china and southeast asia  1900-65. ubc press. isbn 9780774827829. shane  s.  venkataraman  s. (2000).  the promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research . academy of management review. 25 (1)  217–226. doi 10.5465/amr.2000.2791611. jstor 259271. shane  s. (2013).  the genetics of entrepreneurial performance . international small business journal. 31 (5)  473–495. doi 10.1177/0266242613485767. thompson heames  joyce  and jacob w. breland.  management pioneer contributors  30-year review.  journal of management history 16.4 (2010)  427-436. online whaples  robert.  economic history and entrepreneurship.  in the routledge handbook of modern economic history (routledge  2013). 84-94. zahra  shaker a. (2009).  a typology of social entrepreneurs  motives  search processes and ethical challenges . journal of business venturing. 24 (5)  519–532. doi 10.1016/j.jbusvent.2008.04.007. zhang  s.x.  cueto  j. (2015).  the study of bias in entrepreneurship . entrepreneurship theory and practice. 41 (3)  419–454. doi 10.1111/etap.12212.
an organizational founder is a person who has undertaken some or all of the work needed to create a new organization  whether this is a business  a charitable organization  a governing body  a school  a group of entertainers  or some other kind of organization. if there are multiple founders  each can be referred to as a co-founder. if the organization is a business  the founder is usually an entrepreneur. if an organization is created to carry out charitable work  the founder is generally considered a philanthropist.   == issues arising from the role == a number of specific issues have been identified in connection with the role of the founder. the founder of an organization might be so closely identified with that organization  or so heavily involved in its operations  that the organization can struggle to exist without the founder s presence.  one practical way to cope with overreliance on a founder is to distribute management duties so that others are clearly responsible for important operations. if the founder is on the nonprofit s board  part of the solution is to make sure that the board is diverse  balanced  and regularly infused with new blood .   === legal status === the language of securities regulation in the united states considers co-founders to be  promoters  under regulation d. the u.s. securities and exchange commission definition of  promoter  includes  (i) any person who  acting alone or in conjunction with one or more other persons  directly or indirectly takes initiative in founding and organizing the business or enterprise of an issuer  however  not every promoter is a co-founder. in fact  there is no formal  legal definition of what makes somebody a co-founder. the right to call oneself a co-founder can be established through an agreement with one s fellow co-founders or with permission of the board of directors  investors  or shareholders of a startup company. when there is no definitive agreement (like shareholders  agreement)  disputes about who the co-founders are can arise.   === founder emeritus === some organizations maintain a connection with their founder by establishing a position of founder emeritus  either as an entirely symbolic post  or as a position with some power  such as a permanent position on the board of directors. a drawback to such an arrangement is the possibility that the founder will clash with the person who has replaced him as leader of the organization  and that such a conflict will affect the performance of the founder emeritus as a board member.   === founder s dilemma === in some instances  the desire of the founder to maintain control over the organization becomes a problem because  when an entrepreneurial organization is successful   [i]t outgrows the ability of the founder  or even of a small team around the founder  to control . the harvard business
review identified this problem as the founder s dilemma  noting that in most successful companies  the founder is pushed out of control by investors within the first few years after the formation of the company. in some cases  a company may have multiple founders  and a prominent source of conflict can be disagreements between these founders as the company evolves. efforts must be made to balance the responsibilities of each so that no one founding member feels involuntarily diminished in their role relative to the others.   === forgotten founder === another problem that can arise is that of the forgotten founder  a person who participates early on in the formation of an enterprise  but leaves or is ousted before it achieves success  and then returns to claim a legal right to equity  intellectual property  or some other fruits of that success. to avoid this problem  it is advised that the entity  incorporate early and issue shares that are subject to vesting over time .   == see also == startup company#founders/entrepreneurs   == references ==
innovation in its modern meaning is  a new idea  creative thoughts  new imaginations in form of device or method .  innovation is often also viewed as the application of better solutions that meet new requirements  unarticulated needs  or existing market needs. such innovation takes place through the provision of more-effective products  processes  services  technologies  or business models that are made available to markets  governments and society. an innovation is something original and more effective and  as a consequence  new  that  breaks into  the market or society. innovation is related to  but not the same as  invention  as innovation is more apt to involve the practical implementation of an invention (ie new / improved ability) to make a meaningful impact in the market or society  and not all innovations require an invention. innovation often manifests itself via the engineering process  when the problem being solved is of a technical or scientific nature. the opposite of innovation is exnovation. while a novel device is often described as an innovation  in economics  management science  and other fields of practice and analysis  innovation is generally considered to be the result of a process that brings together various novel ideas in such a way that they affect society. in industrial economics  innovations are created and found empirically from services to meet growing consumer demand.innovation also has an older historical meaning which is quite different.  from the 1400s through the 1600s  prior to early american settlement  the concept of  innovation  was pejorative. it was an early modern synonym for rebellion  revolt and heresy.   == definition == a 2014 survey of literature on innovation found over 40 definitions. in an industrial survey of how the software industry defined innovation  the following definition given by crossan and apaydin was considered to be the most complete  which builds on the organisation for economic co-operation and development (oecd) manual s definition  innovation is production or adoption  assimilation  and exploitation of a value-added novelty in economic and social spheres  renewal and enlargement of products  services  and markets  development of new methods of production  and the establishment of new management systems. it is both a process and an outcome.  according to kanter  innovation includes original invention and creative use and defines innovation as a generation  admission and realization of new ideas  products  services and processes. two main dimensions of innovation were degree of novelty (patent) (i.e. whether an innovation is new to the firm  new to the market  new to the industry  or new to the world) and kind of innovation (i.e. whether it is processor product-service system innovation). in recent organizational scholarship  researchers of workplaces have also distinguished innovation to be separate from creativity  by providing an updated definition of these two related but distinct constructs workplace creativity concerns
the cognitive and behavioral processes applied when attempting to generate novel ideas. workplace innovation concerns the processes applied when attempting to implement new ideas. specifically  innovation involves some combination of problem/opportunity identification  the introduction  adoption or modification of new ideas germane to organizational needs  the promotion of these ideas  and the practical implementation of these ideas.   == inter-disciplinary views ==   === business and economics ===  in business and in economics  innovation can become a catalyst for growth. with rapid advancements in transportation and communications over the past few decades  the old-world concepts of factor endowments and comparative advantage which focused on an area s unique inputs are outmoded for today s global economy. economist joseph schumpeter (1883–1950)  who contributed greatly to the study of innovation economics  argued that industries must incessantly revolutionize the economic structure from within  that is innovate with better or more effective processes and products  as well as market distribution  such as the connection from the craft shop to factory. he famously asserted that  creative destruction is the essential fact about capitalism . entrepreneurs continuously look for better ways to satisfy their consumer base with improved quality  durability  service and price which come to fruition in innovation with advanced technologies and organizational strategies.a prime example of innovation involved the explosive boom of silicon valley startups out of the stanford industrial park. in 1957  dissatisfied employees of shockley semiconductor  the company of nobel laureate and co-inventor of the transistor william shockley  left to form an independent firm  fairchild semiconductor. after several years  fairchild developed into a formidable presence in the sector. eventually  these founders left to start their own companies based on their own  unique  latest ideas  and then leading employees started their own firms. over the next 20 years  this snowball process launched the momentous startup-company explosion of information-technology firms. essentially  silicon valley began as 65 new enterprises born out of shockley s eight former employees. since then  hubs of innovation have sprung up globally with similar metonyms  including silicon alley encompassing new york city. another example involves business incubators – a phenomenon nurtured by governments around the world  close to knowledge clusters (mostly research-based) like universities or other government excellence centres – which aim primarily to channel generated knowledge to applied innovation outcomes in order to stimulate regional or national economic growth.   === organizations === in the organizational context  innovation may be linked to positive changes in efficiency  productivity  quality  competitiveness  and market share. however  recent research findings highlight the complementary role of organizational culture in enabling organizations to translate innovative activity into tangible performance improvements. organizations can also improve profits and performance by providing work groups opportunities and resources to innovate  in addition to employee s core job tasks. peter drucker wrote   innovation is the specific function of entrepreneurship  whether in
an existing business  a public service institution  or a new venture started by a lone individual in the family kitchen. it is the means by which the entrepreneur either creates new wealth-producing resources or endows existing resources with enhanced potential for creating wealth. –drucker according to clayton christensen  disruptive innovation is the key to future success in business. the organization requires a proper structure in order to retain competitive advantage. it is necessary to create and nurture an environment of innovation. executives and managers need to break away from traditional ways of thinking and use change to their advantage. it is a time of risk but even greater opportunity. the world of work is changing with the increase in the use of technology and both companies and businesses are becoming increasingly competitive. companies will have to downsize or reengineer their operations to remain competitive. this will affect employment as businesses will be forced to reduce the number of people employed while accomplishing the same amount of work if not more.while disruptive innovation will typically  attack a traditional business model with a lower-cost solution and overtake incumbent firms quickly  foundational innovation is slower  and typically has the potential to create new foundations for global technology systems over the longer term. foundational innovation tends to transform business operating models as entirely new business models emerge over many years  with gradual and steady adoption of the innovation leading to waves of technological and institutional change that gain momentum more slowly.  the advent of the packet-switched communication protocol tcp/ip—originally introduced in 1972 to support a single use case for united states department of defense electronic communication (email)  and which gained widespread adoption only in the mid-1990s with the advent of the world wide web—is a foundational technology.all organizations can innovate  including for example hospitals  universities  and local governments. for instance  former mayor martin o’malley pushed the city of baltimore to use citistat  a performance-measurement data and management system that allows city officials to maintain statistics on several areas from crime trends to the conditions of potholes. this system aids in better evaluation of policies and procedures with accountability and efficiency in terms of time and money. in its first year  citistat saved the city $13.2 million. even mass transit systems have innovated with hybrid bus fleets to real-time tracking at bus stands. in addition  the growing use of mobile data terminals in vehicles  that serve as communication hubs between vehicles and a control center  automatically send data on location  passenger counts  engine performance  mileage and other information. this tool helps to deliver and manage transportation systems.still other innovative strategies include hospitals digitizing medical information in electronic medical records. for example  the u.s. department of housing and urban development s hope vi initiatives turned severely distressed public housing in urban areas into revitalized  mixed-income environments  the harlem children’s zone used a community-based approach to educate local area children  and the environmental protection
agency s brownfield grants facilitates turning over brownfields for environmental protection  green spaces  community and commercial development.   === sources === there are several sources of innovation. it can occur as a result of a focus effort by a range of different agents  by chance  or as a result of a major system failure. according to peter f. drucker  the general sources of innovations are different changes in industry structure  in market structure  in local and global demographics  in human perception  mood and meaning  in the amount of already available scientific knowledge  etc.  in the simplest linear model of innovation the traditionally recognized source is manufacturer innovation. this is where an agent (person or business) innovates in order to sell the innovation. specifically  r&d measurement is the commonly used input for innovation  in particular in the business sector  named business expenditure on r&d (berd) that grew over the years on the expenses of the declining r&d invested by the public sector.another source of innovation  only now becoming widely recognized  is end-user innovation. this is where an agent (person or company) develops an innovation for their own (personal or in-house) use because existing products do not meet their needs. mit economist eric von hippel has identified end-user innovation as  by far  the most important and critical in his classic book on the subject   the sources of innovation .the robotics engineer joseph f. engelberger asserts that innovations require only three things   a recognized need competent people with relevant technology financial supporthowever  innovation processes usually involve  identifying customer needs  macro and meso trends  developing competences  and finding financial support. the kline chain-linked model of innovation places emphasis on potential market needs as drivers of the innovation process  and describes the complex and often iterative feedback loops between marketing  design  manufacturing  and r&d. innovation by businesses is achieved in many ways  with much attention now given to formal research and development (r&d) for  breakthrough innovations . r&d help spur on patents and other scientific innovations that leads to productive growth in such areas as industry  medicine  engineering  and government. yet  innovations can be developed by less formal on-the-job modifications of practice  through exchange and combination of professional experience and by many other routes. investigation of relationship between the concepts of innovation and technology transfer revealed overlap. the more radical and revolutionary innovations tend to emerge from r&d  while more incremental innovations may emerge from practice – but there are many exceptions to each of these trends. information technology and changing business processes and management style can produce a work climate favorable to innovation.  for example  the software tool company atlassian conducts quarterly  shipit days  in which employees may work on anything related to the company s products.  google employees work on self-directed projects for 20% of their time (known as
innovation time off). both companies cite these bottom-up processes as major sources for new products and features. an important innovation factor includes customers buying products or using services. as a result  organizations may incorporate users in focus groups (user centred approach)  work closely with so called lead users (lead user approach) or users might adapt their products themselves. the lead user method focuses on idea generation based on leading users to develop breakthrough innovations. u-stir  a project to innovate europe’s surface transportation system  employs such workshops. regarding this user innovation  a great deal of innovation is done by those actually implementing and using technologies and products as part of their normal activities. sometimes user-innovators may become entrepreneurs  selling their product  they may choose to trade their innovation in exchange for other innovations  or they may be adopted by their suppliers. nowadays  they may also choose to freely reveal their innovations  using methods like open source. in such networks of innovation the users or communities of users can further develop technologies and reinvent their social meaning.one technique for innovating a solution to an identified problem is to actually attempt an experiment with many possible solutions. this technique was famously used by thomas edison s laboratory to find a version of the incandescent light bulb economically viable for home use  which involved searching through thousands of possible filament designs before settling on carbonized bamboo. this technique is sometimes used in pharmaceutical drug discovery. thousands of chemical compounds are subjected to high-throughput screening to see if they have any activity against a target molecule which has been identified as biologically significant to a disease. promising compounds can then be studied  modified to improve efficacy  reduce side effects  and reduce cost of manufacture  and if successful turned into treatments. the related technique of a/b testing is often used to help optimize the design of web sites and mobile apps.  this is used by major sites such as amazon.com  facebook  google  and netflix. procter & gamble uses computer-simulated products and online user panels to conduct larger numbers of experiments to guide the design  packaging  and shelf placement of consumer products. capital one uses this technique to drive credit card marketing offers.   === goals and failures === programs of organizational innovation are typically tightly linked to organizational goals and objectives  to the business plan  and to market competitive positioning. one driver for innovation programs in corporations is to achieve growth objectives. as davila et al. (2006) notes   companies cannot grow through cost reduction and reengineering alone... innovation is the key element in providing aggressive top-line growth  and for increasing bottom-line results .one survey across a large number of manufacturing and services organizations found  ranked in decreasing order of popularity  that systematic programs of organizational innovation are most frequently driven by  improved quality  creation of new markets  extension of the product range  reduced labor costs
 improved production processes  reduced materials  reduced environmental damage  replacement of products/services  reduced energy consumption  conformance to regulations.these goals vary between improvements to products  processes and services and dispel a popular myth that innovation deals mainly with new product development. most of the goals could apply to any organization be it a manufacturing facility  marketing company  hospital or government. whether innovation goals are successfully achieved or otherwise depends greatly on the environment prevailing in the organization.conversely  failure can develop in programs of innovations. the causes of failure have been widely researched and can vary considerably. some causes will be external to the organization and outside its influence of control. others will be internal and ultimately within the control of the organization. internal causes of failure can be divided into causes associated with the cultural infrastructure and causes associated with the innovation process itself. common causes of failure within the innovation process in most organizations can be distilled into five types  poor goal definition  poor alignment of actions to goals  poor participation in teams  poor monitoring of results  poor communication and access to information.   == diffusion ==  diffusion of innovation research was first started in 1903 by seminal researcher gabriel tarde  who first plotted the s-shaped diffusion curve. tarde defined the innovation-decision process as a series of steps that include  knowledge forming an attitude a decision to adopt or reject implementation and use confirmation of the decisiononce innovation occurs  innovations may be spread from the innovator to other individuals and groups. this process has been proposed that the lifecycle of innovations can be described using the  s-curve  or diffusion curve. the s-curve maps growth of revenue or productivity against time. in the early stage of a particular innovation  growth is relatively slow as the new product establishes itself. at some point  customers begin to demand and the product growth increases more rapidly. new incremental innovations or changes to the product allow growth to continue. towards the end of its lifecycle  growth slows and may even begin to decline. in the later stages  no amount of new investment in that product will yield a normal rate of return the s-curve derives from an assumption that new products are likely to have  product life  – ie  a start-up phase  a rapid increase in revenue and eventual decline. in fact  the great majority of innovations never get off the bottom of the curve  and never produce normal returns. innovative companies will typically be working on new innovations that will eventually replace older ones. successive s-curves will come along to replace older ones and continue to drive growth upwards. in the figure above the first curve shows a current technology. the second shows an emerging technology that currently yields lower growth but will eventually overtake current technology and lead to even greater levels of growth. the length of life will depend on many factors. 
 == measures == measuring innovation is inherently difficult as it implies commensurability so that comparisons can be made in quantitative terms. innovation  however  is by definition novelty. comparisons are thus often meaningless across products or service. nevertheless  edison et al. in their review of literature on innovation management found 232 innovation metrics. they categorized these measures along five dimensions  ie inputs to the innovation process  output from the innovation process  effect of the innovation output  measures to access the activities in an innovation process and availability of factors that facilitate such a process.there are two different types of measures for innovation  the organizational level and the political level.   === organizational level === the measure of innovation at the organizational level relates to individuals  team-level assessments  and private companies from the smallest to the largest company. measure of innovation for organizations can be conducted by surveys  workshops  consultants  or internal benchmarking. there is today no established general way to measure organizational innovation. corporate measurements are generally structured around balanced scorecards which cover several aspects of innovation such as business measures related to finances  innovation process efficiency  employees  contribution and motivation  as well benefits for customers. measured values will vary widely between businesses  covering for example new product revenue  spending in r&d  time to market  customer and employee perception & satisfaction  number of patents  additional sales resulting from past innovations.   === political level === for the political level  measures of innovation are more focused on a country or region competitive advantage through innovation. in this context  organizational capabilities can be evaluated through various evaluation frameworks  such as those of the european foundation for quality management. the oecd oslo manual (1992) suggests standard guidelines on measuring technological product and process innovation. some people consider the oslo manual complementary to the frascati manual from 1963. the new oslo manual from 2018 takes a wider perspective to innovation  and includes marketing and organizational innovation. these standards are used for example in the european community innovation surveys.other ways of measuring innovation have traditionally been expenditure  for example  investment in r&d (research and development) as percentage of gnp (gross national product). whether this is a good measurement of innovation has been widely discussed and the oslo manual has incorporated some of the critique against earlier methods of measuring. the traditional methods of measuring still inform many policy decisions. the eu lisbon strategy has set as a goal that their average expenditure on r&d should be 3% of gdp.   === indicators === many scholars claim that there is a great bias towards the  science and technology mode  (s&t-mode or sti-mode)  while the  learning by doing  using and interacting mode  (dui-mode) is ignored and measurements and research about it rarely done. for example  an institution may be high tech with the latest equipment  but lacks crucial doing
 using and interacting tasks important for innovation.a common industry view (unsupported by empirical evidence) is that comparative cost-effectiveness research is a form of price control which reduces returns to industry  and thus limits r&d expenditure  stifles future innovation and compromises new products access to markets.  some academics claim cost-effectiveness research is a valuable value-based measure of innovation which accords  truly significant  therapeutic advances (ie providing  health gain ) higher prices than free market mechanisms. such value-based pricing has been viewed as a means of indicating to industry the type of innovation that should be rewarded from the public purse.an australian academic developed the case that national comparative cost-effectiveness analysis systems should be viewed as measuring  health innovation  as an evidence-based policy concept for valuing innovation distinct from valuing through competitive markets  a method which requires strong anti-trust laws to be effective  on the basis that both methods of assessing pharmaceutical innovations are mentioned in annex 2c.1 of the australia-united states free trade agreement.   === indices === several indices attempt to measure innovation and rank entities based on these measures  such as   bloomberg innovation index  bogota manual  similar to the oslo manual  is focused on latin america and the caribbean countries.  creative class  developed by richard florida eiu innovation ranking global competitiveness report global innovation index (gii)  by insead information technology and innovation foundation (itif) index innovation 360 – from the world bank. aggregates innovation indicators (and more) from a number of different public sources innovation capacity index (ici) published by a large number of international professors working in a collaborative fashion. the top scorers of ici 2009–2010 were  1. sweden 82.2  2. finland 77.8  and 3. united states 77.5 innovation index  developed by the indiana business research center  to measure innovation capacity at the county or regional level in the united states innovation union scoreboard innovationsindikator for germany  developed by the federation of german industries (bundesverband der deutschen industrie) in 2005 insead innovation efficacy index international innovation index  produced jointly by the boston consulting group  the national association of manufacturers (nam) and its nonpartisan research affiliate the manufacturing institute  is a worldwide index measuring the level of innovation in a country  nam describes it as the  largest and most comprehensive global index of its kind  management innovation index – model for managing intangibility of organizational creativity  management innovation index nycedc innovation index  by the new york city economic development corporation  tracks new york city s  transformation into a center for high-tech innovation. it measures innovation in the city s growing science and technology industries and is designed to capture the effect of innovation on the city s economy  oecd oslo manual is focused on north america  europe  and other rich economies state technology and science index  developed by the milken institute  is a u.s.-wide benchmark to measure the science
and technology capabilities that furnish high paying jobs based around key components world competitiveness scoreboard   === rankings === many research studies try to rank countries based on measures of innovation. common areas of focus include  high-tech companies  manufacturing  patents  post secondary education  research and development   and research personnel. the left ranking of the top 10 countries below is based on the 2016 bloomberg innovation index. however  studies may vary widely  for example the global innovation index 2016 ranks switzerland as number one wherein countries like south korea and japan do not even make the top ten.   === future === in 2005 jonathan huebner  a physicist working at the pentagon s naval air warfare center  argued on the basis of both u.s. patents and world technological breakthroughs  per capita  that the rate of human technological innovation peaked in 1873 and has been slowing ever since. in his article  he asked  will the level of technology reach a maximum and then decline as in the dark ages  in later comments to new scientist magazine  huebner clarified that while he believed that we will reach a rate of innovation in 2024 equivalent to that of the dark ages  he was not predicting the reoccurrence of the dark ages themselves.john smart criticized the claim and asserted that technological singularity researcher ray kurzweil and others showed a  clear trend of acceleration  not deceleration  when it came to innovations. the foundation replied to huebner the journal his article was published in  citing second life and eharmony as proof of accelerating innovation  to which huebner replied.  however  huebner s findings were confirmed in 2010 with u.s. patent office data.  and in a 2012 paper.   === innovation and development === the theme of innovation as a tool to disrupting patterns of poverty has gained momentum since the mid-2000s among major international development actors such as dfid  gates foundation s use of the grand challenge funding model  and usaid s global development lab. networks have been established to support innovation in development  such as d-lab at mit. investment funds have been established to identify and catalyze innovations in developing countries  such as dfid s global innovation fund  human development innovation fund  and (in partnership with usaid) the global development innovation ventures.   == government policies == given the noticeable effects on efficiency  quality of life  and productive growth  innovation is a key factor in society and economy. consequently  policymakers have long worked to develop environments that will foster innovation and its resulting positive benefits  from funding research and development to supporting regulatory change  funding the development of innovation clusters  and using public purchasing and standardisation to  pull  innovation through. for instance  experts are advocating that the u.s. federal government launch a national infrastructure foundation  a nimble  collaborative strategic intervention organization
that will house innovations programs from fragmented silos under one entity  inform federal officials on innovation performance metrics  strengthen industry-university partnerships  and support innovation economic development initiatives  especially to strengthen regional clusters. because clusters are the geographic incubators of innovative products and processes  a cluster development grant program would also be targeted for implementation. by focusing on innovating in such areas as precision manufacturing  information technology  and clean energy  other areas of national concern would be tackled including government debt  carbon footprint  and oil dependence. the u.s. economic development administration understand this reality in their continued regional innovation clusters initiative. in addition  federal grants in r&d  a crucial driver of innovation and productive growth  should be expanded to levels similar to japan  finland  south korea  and switzerland in order to stay globally competitive. also  such grants should be better procured to metropolitan areas  the essential engines of the american economy.many countries recognize the importance of research and development as well as innovation including japan s ministry of education  culture  sports  science and technology (mext)  germany s federal ministry of education and research   and the ministry of science and technology in the people s republic of china. furthermore  russia s innovation programme is the medvedev modernisation programme which aims at creating a diversified economy based on high technology and innovation. also  the government of western australia has established a number of innovation incentives for government departments. landgate was the first western australian government agency to establish its innovation program.regions have taken a more proactive role in supporting innovation. many regional governments are setting up regional innovation agency to strengthen regional innovation capabilities. in medellin  colombia  the municipality of medellin created in 2009 ruta n to transform the city into a knowledge city.   == see also ==   == references ==
a dentist  also known as a dental surgeon  is a surgeon who specializes in dentistry  the diagnosis  prevention  and treatment of diseases and conditions of the oral cavity. the dentist s supporting team aids in providing oral health services. the dental team includes dental assistants  dental hygienists  dental technicians  and sometimes dental therapists.   == history ==   === middle ages === in china as well as france  the first people to perform dentistry were barbers. they have been categorized into 2 distinct groups  guild of barbers and lay barbers. the first group  the guild of barbers  was created to distinguish  more educated and qualified dental surgeons from lay barbers. guild barbers were trained to do complex surgeries.  the second group  the lay barbers  were qualified to perform regular hygienic services such as shaving and tooth extraction as well as basic surgery. however  in 1400 france made decrees prohibiting lay barbers from practicing all types of surgery. in germany as well as france from 1530 to 1575 publications completely devoted to dentistry were being published.  ambrose pare  often known as the father of surgery  published his own work about the proper maintenance and treatment of teeth. ambrose pare was a french barber surgeon who performed dental care for multiple french monarchs. he is often credited with having raised the status of barber surgeons.   === modern dentistry ===  pierre fauchard of france is often referred to as the  father of modern dentistry  for being the first to publish a scientific textbook (1728) on the techniques and practices of dentistry. over time  trained dentists immigrated from europe to the americas to practice dentistry  and by 1760  america had its own native born practicing dentists. newspapers were used at the time to advertise and promote dental services. in america from 1768–1770 the first application of dentistry to verify forensic cases was being pioneered  this was called forensic dentistry. with the rise of dentists there was also the rise of new methods to improve the quality of dentistry. these new methods included the spinning wheel to rotate a drill and chairs made specifically for dental patients.in the 1840s the world s first dental school and national dental organization were established. along with the first dental school came the establishment of the doctor of dental surgery degree  often referred to as a dds degree. in response to the rise in new dentists as well as dentistry techniques  the first dental practice act was established to regulate dentistry.  in the united states  the first dental practice act required dentists to pass each specific states medical board exam in order to practice dentistry in that particular state. however  because the dental act was rarely enforced  some dentists did not obey the act. from 1846–1855 new dental techniques were being invented such as the use of ester anesthesia for surgery  and the
cohesive gold foil method which enabled gold to be applied to a cavity. the american dental association was established in 1859 after a meeting with 26 dentists. around 1867  the first university associated dental school was established  harvard dental school. lucy hobbs taylor was the first woman to earn a dental degree. in the 1880s  tube toothpaste was created which replaced the original forms of powder or liquid toothpaste. new dental boards  such as the national association of dental examiners  were created to establish standards and uniformity among dentists. in 1887 the first dental laboratory was established  dental laboratories are used to create dentures and crowns that are specific to each patient. in 1895 the dental x-ray was discovered by a german physicist  wilhelm röntgen.in the 20th century new dental techniques and technology were invented such as  the porcelain crowns (1903)  novocain (a local anesthetic) 1905  precision cast fillings (1907)  nylon toothbrushes (1938)  water fluoridation (1945)  fluoride toothpaste (1950)  air driven dental tools (1957)  lasers (1960)  electric toothbrushes (1960)  and home tooth bleaching kits (1989) were invented. inventions such as the air driven dental tools ushered in a new high-speed dentistry.   == responsibilities ==  by nature of their general training  a licensed dentist can carry out most dental treatments such as restorative (dental restorations  crowns  bridges)  orthodontics (braces)  prosthodontic (dentures  crown/bridge)  endodontic (root canal) therapy  periodontal (gum) therapy  and oral surgery (extraction of teeth)  as well as performing examinations  taking radiographs (x-rays) and diagnosis. additionally  dentists can further engage in oral surgery procedures such as dental implant placement. dentists can also prescribe medications such as antibiotics  fluorides  pain killers  local anesthetics  sedatives/hypnotics and any other medications that serve in the treatment of the various conditions that arise in the head and neck. all dds and dmd degree holders are legally qualified to perform a number of more complex procedures such as gingival grafts  bone grafting  sinus lifts  and implants  as well as a range of more invasive oral and maxillofacial surgery procedures  though many choose to pursue residencies or other post-doctoral education to augment their abilities. a few select procedures  such as the administration of general anesthesia  legally require postdoctoral training in the us. while many oral diseases are unique and self-limiting  poor conditions in the oral cavity can lead to poor general health and vice versa  notably  there is a significant link between periodontal and cardiovascular disease. conditions in the oral cavity may also be indicative of other systemic diseases such as osteoporosis  diabetes  aids  and various blood diseases  including malignancies and lymphoma. several studies have suggested that dentists and dental students are at high risk of burnout. during burnout  dentists experience exhaustion  alienate from work and perform less efficiently.  a systemic study identified risk factors associated with
this condition such as practitioner s young age  personality type  gender  status of education  high job strain and / or working hours  and the burden of clinical degrees requisites. the authors of this study concluded that intervention programs at an early stage during the undergraduate level may provide practitioners with a good strategy to prepare for / cope with this condition.   == specialties ==  official specialties as recognized by the american dental association or the american board of dental specialties anesthesiology – the study and administration of general anesthesia  sedation and advanced methods of pain control dental public health – the study of dental epidemiology and social health policies. endodontics – root canal therapy and study of diseases of the dental pulp. oral and maxillofacial pathology – the study  diagnosis  and sometimes the treatment of oral and maxillofacial related diseases. oral and maxillofacial radiology – the study and radiologic interpretation of oral and maxillofacial diseases. oral and maxillofacial surgery – extractions  implants  and maxillofacial surgery which also includes correction of congenital facial deformities. oral medicine orofacial pain oral implantology/implant dentistry orthodontics and dentofacial orthopaedics  – the straightening of teeth and modification of midface and mandibular growth. periodontology (periodontics) – study and treatment of diseases of the gums (non-surgical and surgical) as well as placement and maintenance of dental implants pediatric dentistry (formerly pedodontics) – dentistry for children. teeth  bones and jaw continually grow in children and certain dental issues in children require specific attention. prosthodontics – dentures  bridges and dental implants(restoring/placing). some prosthodontists further their training in  oral and maxillofacial prosthodontics  which is the discipline concerned with the replacement of missing facial structures  such as ears  eyes  noses  etc.specialists in these fields are designated  registrable  (in the united states   board eligible ) and warrant exclusive titles such as dentist anesthesiologist  orthodontist  oral and maxillofacial surgeon  endodontist  pediatric dentist  periodontist  or prosthodontist upon satisfying certain local accreditation requirements (u.s.   board certified ).   == see also == dental hygienist dental technician dental therapist dental assistant   == references ==
a musician is a person who plays a musical instrument or is musically talented. anyone who composes  conducts  or performs music is referred to as a musician. a musician who plays a musical instrument is also known as an instrumentalist. musicians can specialize in any musical style  and some musicians play in a variety of different styles depending on cultures and background. examples of a musician s possible skills include performing  conducting  singing  rapping  producing  composing  arranging  and the orchestration of music.   == musicians by era ==   === medieval ===  in the middle ages  instrumental musicians performed with soft ensembles inside and loud instruments outdoors. many european musicians of this time catered to the roman catholic church  and they provided arrangements structured around gregorian chant structure and masses from church texts.notable musicians  phillipe de vitry guillaume dufay guillaume de machaut hildegard of bingen john jenkins beatritz de dia   === renaissance ===  renaissance musicians produced music that could be played during masses in churches and important chapels. vocal pieces were in latin—the language of church texts of the time—and typically were church-polyphonic or  made up of several simultaneous melodies.  by the end of the 16th century  however  patronage split among many areas  the catholic church  protestant churches  royal courts  wealthy amateurs  and music printing—all provided income sources for composers.notable musicians  giovanni palestrina giovanni gabrieli thomas tallis claudio monteverdi leonardo da vinci   === baroque ===  the baroque period (about 1600 to 1750) introduced heavy use of counterpoint and basso continuo characteristics. vocal and instrumental  color  became more important compared with the renaissance style of music  and emphasized much of the volume  texture and pace of each piece.notable musicians  george frideric handel johann sebastian bach antonio vivaldi   === classical ===  classical music was created by musicians who lived during a time of a rising middle class. many middle-class inhabitants of france at the time lived under long-time absolute monarchies. because of this  much of the music was performed in environments that were more constrained compared with the flourishing times of the renaissance and baroque eras.notable musicians  wolfgang amadeus mozart joseph haydn ludwig van beethoven   === romantic ===  the foundation of romantic period music coincides with what is often called the age of revolutions  an age of upheavals in political  economic  social  and military traditions. this age included the initial transformations of the industrial revolution. a revolutionary energy was also at the core of romanticism  which quite consciously set out to transform not only the theory and practice of poetry and art  but the common perception of the world. some major romantic period precepts survive  and still affect modern culture.notable musicians  ludwig van beethoven frédéric chopin franz schubert niccolò paganini franz liszt charles-valentin alkan richard wagner pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky johannes brahms
johann strauss ii   === 20th to 21st centuries ===  the world transitioned from 19th-century romanticism to 20th century modernism  bringing major musical changes. in 20th-century music  composers and musicians rejected the emotion-dominated romantic period  and strove to represent the world the way they perceived it. musicians wrote to be  ...objective  while objects existed on their own terms. while past eras concentrated on spirituality  this new period placed emphasis on physicality and things that were concrete. the advent of audio recording and mass media in the 20th century caused a boom of all kinds of music—pop  electronic  dance  rock  folk  country and all forms of classical music.   == see also == singer composer tour manager musicians  or  hi-fi  earplugs   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to musicians at wikimedia commons
singing is the act of producing musical sounds with the voice and augments regular speech by the use of sustained tonality  rhythm  and a variety of vocal techniques. a person who sings is called a singer or vocalist (in jazz and popular music). singers perform music (arias  recitatives  songs  etc.) that can be sung with or without accompaniment by musical instruments. singing is often done in an ensemble of musicians  such as a choir of singers or a band of instrumentalists. singers may perform as soloists or accompanied by anything from a single instrument (as in art song or some jazz styles) up to a symphony orchestra or big band. different singing styles include art music such as opera and chinese opera  indian music and religious music styles such as gospel  traditional music styles  world music  jazz  blues  ghazal and popular music styles such as pop  rock  electronic dance music and filmi (indian film songs). singing can be formal or informal  arranged or improvised. it may be done as a form of religious devotion  as a hobby  as a source of pleasure  comfort or ritual  as part of music education or as a profession. excellence in singing requires time  dedication  instruction and regular practice. if practice is done on a regular basis then the sounds can become more clear and strong. professional singers usually build their careers around one specific musical genre  such as classical or rock  although there are singers with crossover success (singing in more than one genre). professional singers usually take voice training provided by voice teachers or vocal coaches throughout their careers.   == voices ==  in its physical aspect  singing has a well-defined technique that depends on the use of the lungs  which act as an air supply or bellows  on the larynx  which acts as a reed or vibrator  on the chest  head cavities and skeleton  which have the function of an amplifier  as the tube in a wind instrument  and on the tongue  which together with the palate  teeth  and lips articulate and impose consonants and vowels on the amplified sound. though these four mechanisms function independently  they are nevertheless coordinated in the establishment of a vocal technique and are made to interact upon one another. during passive breathing  air is inhaled with the diaphragm while exhalation occurs without any effort. exhalation may be aided by the abdominal  internal intercostal and lower pelvis/pelvic muscles. inhalation is aided by use of external intercostals  scalenes  and sternocleidomastoid muscles. the pitch is altered with the vocal cords. with the lips closed  this is called humming. the sound of each individual s singing voice is entirely unique not only because of the actual shape and size of an individual s vocal cords  but also due to the size and shape of the rest of that
person s body. humans have vocal folds which can loosen  tighten  or change their thickness  and over which breath can be transferred at varying pressures. the shape of the chest and neck  the position of the tongue  and the tightness of otherwise unrelated muscles can be altered. any one of these actions results in a change in pitch  volume (loudness)  timbre  or tone of the sound produced. sound also resonates within different parts of the body and an individual s size and bone structure can affect the sound produced by an individual. singers can also learn to project sound in certain ways so that it resonates better within their vocal tract. this is known as vocal resonation. another major influence on vocal sound and production is the function of the larynx which people can manipulate in different ways to produce different sounds. these different kinds of laryngeal function are described as different kinds of vocal registers. the primary method for singers to accomplish this is through the use of the singer s formant  which has been shown to match particularly well to the most sensitive part of the ear s frequency range.it has also been shown that a more powerful voice may be achieved with a fatter and fluid-like vocal fold mucosa. the more pliable the mucosa  the more efficient the transfer of energy from the airflow to the vocal folds.   === vocal registration ===  vocal registration refers to the system of vocal registers within the voice. a register in the voice is a particular series of tones  produced in the same vibratory pattern of the vocal folds  and possessing the same quality. registers originate in laryngeal function. they occur because the vocal folds are capable of producing several different vibratory patterns. each of these vibratory patterns appears within a particular range of pitches and produces certain characteristic sounds. the occurrence of registers has also been attributed to effects of the acoustic interaction between the vocal fold oscillation and the vocal tract. the term  register  can be somewhat confusing as it encompasses several aspects of the voice. the term register can be used to refer to any of the following  a particular part of the vocal range such as the upper  middle  or lower registers. a resonance area such as chest voice or head voice. a phonatory process (phonation is the process of producing vocal sound by the vibration of the vocal folds that is in turn modified by the resonance of the vocal tract) a certain vocal timbre or vocal  color  a region of the voice which is defined or delimited by vocal breaks.in linguistics  a register language is a language which combines tone and vowel phonation into a single phonological system. within speech pathology  the term vocal register has three constituent elements  a certain vibratory pattern of the vocal folds  a certain series of pitches  and a certain type of sound. speech pathologists
identify four vocal registers based on the physiology of laryngeal function  the vocal fry register  the modal register  the falsetto register  and the whistle register. this view is also adopted by many vocal pedagogues.   === vocal resonation ===  vocal resonation is the process by which the basic product of phonation is enhanced in timbre and/or intensity by the air-filled cavities through which it passes on its way to the outside air. various terms related to the resonation process include amplification  enrichment  enlargement  improvement  intensification  and prolongation  although in strictly scientific usage acoustic authorities would question most of them. the main point to be drawn from these terms by a singer or speaker is that the end result of resonation is  or should be  to make a better sound. there are seven areas that may be listed as possible vocal resonators. in sequence from the lowest within the body to the highest  these areas are the chest  the tracheal tree  the larynx itself  the pharynx  the oral cavity  the nasal cavity  and the sinuses.   === chest voice and head voice ===  chest voice and head voice are terms used within vocal music. the use of these terms varies widely within vocal pedagogical circles and there is currently no one consistent opinion among vocal music professionals in regards to these terms. chest voice can be used in relation to a particular part of the vocal range or type of vocal register  a vocal resonance area  or a specific vocal timbre. head voice can be used in relation to a particular part of the vocal range or type of vocal register or a vocal resonance area. in men  the head voice is commonly referred to as the falsetto.   ==== history and development ==== the first recorded mention of the terms chest voice and head voice was around the 13th century  when it was distinguished from the  throat voice  (pectoris  guttoris  capitis—at this time it is likely that head voice referred to the falsetto register) by the writers johannes de garlandia and jerome of moravia. the terms were later adopted within bel canto  the italian opera singing method  where chest voice was identified as the lowest and head voice the highest of three vocal registers  the chest  passagio  and head registers. this approach is still taught by some vocal pedagogists today. another current popular approach that is based on the bel canto model is to divide both men and women s voices into three registers. men s voices are divided into  chest register   head register  and  falsetto register  and woman s voices into  chest register   middle register  and  head register . such pedagogists teach that the head register is a vocal technique used in singing to describe the resonance felt in the singer s head.however
 as knowledge of physiology has increased over the past two hundred years  so has the understanding of the physical process of singing and vocal production. as a result  many vocal pedagogists  such as ralph appelman at indiana university and william vennard at the university of southern california  have redefined or even abandoned the use of the terms chest voice and head voice. in particular  the use of the terms chest register and head register have become controversial since vocal registration is more commonly seen today as a product of laryngeal function that is unrelated to the physiology of the chest  lungs  and head. for this reason  many vocal pedagogists argue that it is meaningless to speak of registers being produced in the chest or head. they argue that the vibratory sensations which are felt in these areas are resonance phenomena and should be described in terms related to vocal resonance  not to registers. these vocal pedagogists prefer the terms chest voice and head voice over the term register. this view believes that the problems which people identify as register problems are really problems of resonance adjustment. this view is also in alignment with the views of other academic fields that study vocal registration including speech pathology  phonetics  and linguistics. although both methods are still in use  current vocal pedagogical practice tends to adopt the newer more scientific view. also  some vocal pedagogists take ideas from both viewpoints.the contemporary use of the term chest voice often refers to a specific kind of vocal coloration or vocal timbre. in classical singing  its use is limited entirely to the lower part of the modal register or normal voice. within other forms of singing  chest voice is often applied throughout the modal register. chest timbre can add a wonderful array of sounds to a singer s vocal interpretive palette. however  the use of overly strong chest voice in the higher registers in an attempt to hit higher notes in the chest can lead to forcing. forcing can lead consequently to vocal deterioration.   === classifying singing voices ===  in european classical music and opera  voices are treated like musical instruments. composers who write vocal music must have an understanding of the skills  talents  and vocal properties of singers. voice classification is the process by which human singing voices are evaluated and are thereby designated into voice types. these qualities include but are not limited to vocal range  vocal weight  vocal tessitura  vocal timbre  and vocal transition points such as breaks and lifts within the voice. other considerations are physical characteristics  speech level  scientific testing  and vocal registration. the science behind voice classification developed within european classical music has been slow in adapting to more modern forms of singing. voice classification is often used within opera to associate possible roles with potential voices. there are currently several different systems in use within classical music including the german fach
system and the choral music system among many others. no system is universally applied or accepted.however  most classical music systems acknowledge seven different major voice categories. women are typically divided into three groups  soprano  mezzo-soprano  and contralto. men are usually divided into four groups  countertenor  tenor  baritone  and bass. when considering voices of pre-pubescent children an eighth term  treble  can be applied. within each of these major categories  there are several sub-categories that identify specific vocal qualities like coloratura facility and vocal weight to differentiate between voices.within choral music  singers  voices are divided solely on the basis of vocal range. choral music most commonly divides vocal parts into high and low voices within each sex (satb  or soprano  alto  tenor  and bass). as a result  the typical choral situation gives many opportunities for misclassification to occur. since most people have medium voices  they must be assigned to a part that is either too high or too low for them  the mezzo-soprano must sing soprano or alto and the baritone must sing tenor or bass. either option can present problems for the singer  but for most singers  there are fewer dangers in singing too low than in singing too high.within contemporary forms of music (sometimes referred to as contemporary commercial music)  singers are classified by the style of music they sing  such as jazz  pop  blues  soul  country  folk  and rock styles. there is currently no authoritative voice classification system within non-classical music. attempts have been made to adopt classical voice type terms to other forms of singing but such attempts have been met with controversy. the development of voice categorizations were made with the understanding that the singer would be using classical vocal technique within a specified range using unamplified (no microphones) vocal production. since contemporary musicians use different vocal techniques  microphones  and are not forced to fit into a specific vocal role  applying such terms as soprano  tenor  baritone  etc. can be misleading or even inaccurate.   == vocal pedagogy ==  vocal pedagogy is the study of the teaching of singing. the art and science of vocal pedagogy has a long history that began in ancient greece and continues to develop and change today. professions that practice the art and science of vocal pedagogy include vocal coaches  choral directors  vocal music educators  opera directors  and other teachers of singing. vocal pedagogy concepts are a part of developing proper vocal technique. typical areas of study include the following  anatomy and physiology as it relates to the physical process of singing vocal health and voice disorders related to singing breathing and air support for singing phonation vocal resonation or voice projection vocal registration  a particular series of tones  produced in the same vibratory pattern of the vocal folds  and possessing the same quality  which originate in
laryngeal function  because each of these vibratory patterns appears within a particular range of pitches and produces certain characteristic sounds. voice classification vocal styles  for classical singers  this includes styles ranging from lieder to opera  for pop singers  styles can include  belted out  a blues ballads  for jazz singers  styles can include swing ballads and scatting. techniques used in styles such as sostenuto and legato  range extension  tone quality  vibrato  and coloratura   === vocal technique ===  singing when done with proper vocal technique is an integrated and coordinated act that effectively coordinates the physical processes of singing. there are four physical processes involved in producing vocal sound  respiration  phonation  resonation  and articulation. these processes occur in the following sequence   breath is taken sound is initiated in the larynx the vocal resonators receive the sound and influence it the articulators shape the sound into recognizable units correct posture for singing relaxation warm up before singingalthough these four processes are often considered separately when studied  in actual practice  they merge into one coordinated function. with an effective singer or speaker  one should rarely be reminded of the process involved as their mind and body are so coordinated that one only perceives the resulting unified function. many vocal problems result from a lack of coordination within this process.since singing is a coordinated act  it is difficult to discuss any of the individual technical areas and processes without relating them to the others. for example  phonation only comes into perspective when it is connected with respiration  the articulators affect resonance  the resonators affect the vocal folds  the vocal folds affect breath control  and so forth. vocal problems are often a result of a breakdown in one part of this coordinated process which causes voice teachers to frequently focus in intensively on one area of the process with their student until that issue is resolved. however  some areas of the art of singing are so much the result of coordinated functions that it is hard to discuss them under a traditional heading like phonation  resonation  articulation  or respiration. once the voice student has become aware of the physical processes that make up the act of singing and of how those processes function  the student begins the task of trying to coordinate them. inevitably  students and teachers will become more concerned with one area of the technique than another. the various processes may progress at different rates  with a resulting imbalance or lack of coordination. the areas of vocal technique which seem to depend most strongly on the student s ability to coordinate various functions are  extending the vocal range to its maximum potential developing consistent vocal production with a consistent tone quality developing flexibility and agility achieving a balanced vibrato a blend of chest and head voice on every note of the range   ==== developing the
singing voice ==== singing is a skill that requires highly developed muscle reflexes. singing does not require much muscle strength but it does require a high degree of muscle coordination. individuals can develop their voices further through the careful and systematic practice of both songs and vocal exercises. vocal exercises have several purposes  including warming up the voice  extending the vocal range   lining up  the voice horizontally and vertically  and acquiring vocal techniques such as legato  staccato  control of dynamics  rapid figurations  learning to sing wide intervals comfortably  singing trills  singing melismas and correcting vocal faults. vocal pedagogists instruct their students to exercise their voices in an intelligent manner. singers should be thinking constantly about the kind of sound they are making and the kind of sensations they are feeling while they are singing.learning to sing is an activity that benefits from the involvement of an instructor. a singer does not hear the same sounds inside his or her head that others hear outside. therefore  having a guide who can tell a student what kinds of sounds he or she is producing guides a singer to understand which of the internal sounds correspond to the desired sounds required by the style of singing the student aims to re-create.   === ten health benefits of singing ===   ==== physical ==== 1. works the lungs  tones up the intercostals and diaphragm. 2. improves sleep 3. benefits cardio function by improving aerobic capacity 4. relaxes overall muscle tension 5. improves posture. 6. opens up sinuses and respiratory tubes 7. with training  could help decrease snoring 8. releases endorphins 9. boosts immune system 10. helps improve physical balance in people affected by illnesses such as parkinson s disease   === extending vocal range === an important goal of vocal development is to learn to sing to the natural limits of one s vocal range without any obvious or distracting changes of quality or technique. vocal pedagogists teach that a singer can only achieve this goal when all of the physical processes involved in singing (such as laryngeal action  breath support  resonance adjustment  and articulatory movement) are effectively working together. most vocal pedagogists believe in coordinating these processes by (1) establishing good vocal habits in the most comfortable tessitura of the voice  and then (2) slowly expanding the range.there are three factors that significantly affect the ability to sing higher or lower   the energy factor –  energy  has several connotations. it refers to the total response of the body to the making of sound  to a dynamic relationship between the breathing-in muscles and the breathing-out muscles known as the breath support mechanism  to the amount of breath pressure delivered to the vocal folds and their resistance to that pressure  and to the dynamic level of the sound. the space factor –  space  refers to the size of the inside of the mouth and the position
of the palate and larynx. generally speaking  a singer s mouth should be opened wider the higher he or she sings. the internal space or position of the soft palate and larynx can be widened by relaxing the throat. vocal pedagogists describe this as feeling like the  beginning of a yawn . the depth factor –  depth  has two connotations. it refers to the actual physical sensations of depth in the body and vocal mechanism  and to mental concepts of depth that are related to tone quality.mckinney says   these three factors can be expressed in three basic rules  (1) as you sing higher  you must use more energy  as you sing lower  you must use less. (2) as you sing higher  you must use more space  as you sing lower  you must use less. (3) as you sing higher  you must use more depth  as you sing lower  you must use less.    === posture === the singing process functions best when certain physical conditions of the body are put in place. the ability to move air in and out of the body freely and to obtain the needed quantity of air can be seriously affected by the posture of the various parts of the breathing mechanism. a sunken chest position will limit the capacity of the lungs  and a tense abdominal wall will inhibit the downward travel of the diaphragm. good posture allows the breathing mechanism to fulfill its basic function efficiently without any undue expenditure of energy. good posture also makes it easier to initiate phonation and to tune the resonators as proper alignment prevents unnecessary tension in the body. vocal pedagogists have also noted that when singers assume good posture it often provides them with a greater sense of self-assurance and poise while performing. audiences also tend to respond better to singers with good posture. habitual good posture also ultimately improves the overall health of the body by enabling better blood circulation and preventing fatigue and stress on the body.there are eight components of the ideal singing posture   feet slightly apart legs straight but knees slightly bent hips facing straight forward spine aligned abdomen flat chest comfortably forward shoulders down and back head facing straight forward   === breathing and breath support === natural breathing has three stages  a breathing-in period  a breathing out period  and a resting or recovery period  these stages are not usually consciously controlled. within singing  there are four stages of breathing  a breathing-in period (inhalation)  a setting up controls period (suspension)  a controlled exhalation period (phonation)  and a recovery period. these stages must be under conscious control by the singer until they become conditioned reflexes. many singers abandon conscious controls before their reflexes are fully conditioned which ultimately leads to chronic vocal problems.   === vibrato === vibrato is a technique in which a sustained note wavers very quickly and consistently
between a higher and a lower pitch  giving the note a slight quaver. vibrato is the pulse or wave in a sustained tone. vibrato occurs naturally and is the result of proper breath support and a relaxed vocal apparatus. some studies have shown that vibrato is the result of a neuromuscular tremor in the vocal folds. in 1922 max schoen was the first to make the comparison of vibrato to a tremor due to change in amplitude  lack of automatic control and it being half the rate of normal muscular discharge. some singers use vibrato as a means of expression. many successful artists can sing a deep  rich vibrato.   === extended vocal technique ===   == vocal music ==  vocal music is music performed by one or more singers  which are typically called songs  and which may be performed with or without instrumental accompaniment  in which singing provides the main focus of the piece. vocal music is probably the oldest form of music since it does not require any instrument or equipment besides the voice. all musical cultures have some form of vocal music and there are many long-standing singing traditions throughout the world s cultures. music which employs singing but does not feature it prominently is generally considered as instrumental music. for example  some blues rock songs may have a short  simple call-and-response chorus  but the emphasis in the song is on the instrumental melodies and improvisation. vocal music typically features sung words called lyrics  although there are notable examples of vocal music that are performed using non-linguistic syllables or noises  sometimes as musical onomatopoeia. a short piece of vocal music with lyrics is broadly termed a song  although  in classical music  terms such as aria are typically used.   === genres of vocal music ===  vocal music is written in many different forms and styles which are often labeled within a particular genre of music. these genres include indian classical music  art music  popular music  traditional music  regional and national music  and fusions of those genres. within these larger genres are many subgenres. for example  popular music would encompass blues  jazz  country music  easy listening  hip hop  rock music  and several other genres. there may also be a subgenre within a subgenre such as vocalese and scat singing in jazz.   ==== popular and traditional music ==== in many modern pop musical groups  a lead singer performs the primary vocals or melody of a song  as opposed to a backing singer who sings backup vocals or the harmony of a song. backing vocalists sing some  but usually not all  parts of the song often singing only in a song s refrain or humming in the background. an exception is five-part gospel a cappella music  where the lead is the highest of the five voices and sings a descant and not the melody.
some artists may sing both the lead and backing vocals on audio recordings by overlapping recorded vocal tracks. popular music includes a range of vocal styles. hip-hop uses rapping  the rhythmic delivery of rhymes in a rhythmic speech over a beat or without accompaniment. some types of rapping consist mostly or entirely of speech and chanting  like the jamaican  toasting . in some types of rapping  the performers may interpolate short sung or half-sung passages. blues singing is based on the use of the blue notes–notes sung at a slightly lower pitch than that of the major scale for expressive purposes. in heavy metal and hardcore punk subgenres  vocal styles can include techniques such as screams  shouts  and unusual sounds such as the  death growl . one difference between live performances in the popular and classical genres is that whereas classical performers often sing without amplification in small- to mid-size halls  in popular music  a microphone and pa system (amplifier and speakers) are used in almost all performance venues  even a small coffee house. the use of the microphone has had several impacts on popular music. for one  it facilitated the development of intimate  expressive singing styles such as  crooning  which would not have enough projection and volume if done without a microphone. as well  pop singers who use microphones can do a range of other vocal styles that would not project without amplification  such as making whispering sounds  humming  and mixing half-sung and sung tones. as well  some performers use the microphone s response patterns to create effects  such as bringing the mic very close to the mouth to get an enhanced bass response  or  in the case of hip-hop beatboxers  doing plosive  p  and  b  sounds into the mic to create percussive effects. in the 2000s  controversy arose over the widespread use of electronic auto-tune pitch correction devices with recorded and live popular music vocals. controversy has also arisen due to cases where pop singers have been found to be lip-syncing to a pre-recorded recording of their vocal performance or  in the case of the controversial act milli vanilli  lip-syncing to tracks recorded by other uncredited singers. while some bands use backup singers who only sing when they are onstage  it is common for backup singers in popular music to have other roles. in many rock and metal bands  the musicians doing backup vocals also play instruments  such as rhythm guitar  electric bass  or drums. in latin or afro-cuban groups  backup singers may play percussion instruments or shakers while singing. in some pop and hip-hop groups and in musical theater  the backup singers may be required to perform elaborately choreographed dance routines while they sing through headset microphones.   == careers ==  the salaries and working conditions for vocalists vary a great deal. while jobs in other music fields such
as music education tend to be based on full-time  salaried positions  singing jobs tend to be based on contracts for individual shows or performances  or for a sequence of shows aspiring singers and vocalists must have musical skill  an excellent voice  the ability to work with people  and a sense of showmanship and drama.  additionally  singers need to have the ambition and drive to continually study and improve  professional singers continue to seek out vocal coaching to hone their skills  extend their range  and learn new styles. as well  aspiring singers need to gain specialized skills in the vocal techniques used to interpret songs  learn about the vocal literature from their chosen style of music  and gain skills in choral music techniques  sight singing and memorizing songs  and vocal exercises. in order to become independent and survive the competitive atmosphere and stay for a longer time and have a long career  singers must learn the skill of music composing  music producing and lyrics writing  they should take advantage of social media platforms like youtube and upload their musical contents. many musicians gained popularity because of social media and got recognition  example justin bieber. after getting recognition and popularity for their  original  or  cover  songs  they can get offers for doing live shows from the event organisers  which is a large source of income for musicians across the world  youtube also pays if the channel of the singer in youtube is popular and have significant amount of subscribers and viewership. this they can also monetise (earn revenues) from streaming apps. they must also take steps to market themselves to buyers of vocal talent  by doing auditions in front of a music director. depending on the style of vocal music that a person has trained in  the  talent buyers  that they seek out may be record company  a&r representatives  music director  choir directors  nightclub managers  or concert promoters. a cd or dvd with excerpts of vocal performances. some singers hire an agent or manager to help them to seek out engagements and other performance opportunities  the agent or manager is often paid by receiving a percentage of the fees that the singer gets from performing onstage.   == singing competitions == in recent years  the talent of singing has become competitive. currently  there are several television shows that showcase these talents. american idol was one of the prominent of these shows. debuted in 2002  it was one of the first singing competition shows. the first singing reality show was sa re ga ma pa launched by zee tv in the 1995. at the american idol contestants audition in front of a panel of judges to see if they can move on to the next round in hollywood  from then  the competition begins. the field of contestants is narrowed down week by
week until a winner is chosen. in order to move on to the next round  the contestants fate is determined by public vote. the voice is another well-known singing competition program. similar to american idol  the contestants audition in front of a panel of judges  however  the judges chairs are faced towards the audience during the performance. if the coaches are interested in the artist  they will press their button signifying they want to coach them. once the auditions conclude  coaches have their team of artists and the competition begins. coaches then mentor their artists and they compete to find the best singer. other well-known singing competitions include the x factor  america s got talent  rising star and the sing-off.   == health benefits == scientific studies suggest that singing can have positive effects on people s health.  a preliminary study based on self-reported data from a survey of students participating in choral singing found perceived benefits including increased lung capacity  improved mood  stress reduction  as well as perceived social and spiritual benefits. however  one much older study of lung capacity compared those with professional vocal training to those without  and failed to back up the claims of increased lung capacity. singing may positively influence the immune system through the reduction of stress.  one study found that both singing and listening to choral music reduces the level of stress hormones and increases immune function.a multinational collaboration to study the connection between singing and health was established in 2009  called advancing interdisciplinary research in singing (airs). singing provides physical  cognitive  and emotional benefits to participants. when they step on stage  many singers forget their worries and focus solely on the song. singing is becoming a more widely known method of increasing an individual s overall health and wellness  in turn helping them to battle diseases such as cancer more effectively due to decreased stress  releasing of endorphin s  and increased lung capacity.   === effect on the brain === john daniel scott  among others  have cited that  people who sing are more likely to be happy . this is because  singing elevates the levels of neurotransmitters which are associated with pleasure and well being . humans have a long prehistory of music  especially singing  before written language  stories were passed down through song  because song is often more memorable. there is also evidence that music or singing may have evolved in humans before language. levitin  in his this is your brain on music  argues that  music may be the activity that prepared our pre-human ancestors for speech communication  and that  singing ... might have helped our species to refine motor skills  paving the way for the development of the exquisitely fine muscle control required for vocal ... speech  (260). on the other hand  he cites pinker  who  argued that language is
an adaptation and music is its spandrel ... an evolutionary accident piggybacking on language  (248).studies have found evidence suggesting the mental  as well as physical  benefits of singing. when conducting a study with 21 members of a choir at three different points over one year  three themes suggested three areas of benefits  the social impact (connectedness with others)  personal impact (positive emotions  self-perception  etc.)  and functional outcomes (health benefits of being in the choir). findings showed that a sense of wellbeing is associated with singing  by uplifting the mood of the participants and releasing endorphins in the brain. many singers also reported that the singing helped then regulate stress and relax  allowing them to deal better with their daily lives. from a social perspective  approval from the audience  and interaction with other choir members in a positive manner is also beneficial. singing is beneficial for pregnant mothers. by giving them another medium of communication with their newborns  mothers in one study reported feelings of love and affection when singing to their unborn children. they also reported feeling more relaxed than ever before during their stressful pregnancy. a song can have nostalgic significance by reminding a singer of the past  and momentarily transport them  allowing them to focus on singing and embrace the activity as an escape from their daily lives and problems.   === effect on body === a recent study by tenovus cancer care found that singing in a choir for just one hour boosts levels of immune proteins in cancer patients and has a positive overall effect on the health of patients. the study explores the possibility that singing could help put patients in the best mental and physical shape to receive the treatment they need  by reducing stress hormones  and increasing quantities of cytokines- proteins of the immune system that can increase the body s ability to fight disease.  singing gives you physical benefits like breath control and muscle movement and enunciation  as well as the learning benefits of processing information  says a musical director and accompanist in the study. the enunciation and speech benefits tie into the language benefits detailed below.some have advocated  as in an 2011 article in the toronto star  that everyone to sing  even if they are not musically talented  because of its health benefits. singing lowers blood pressure by releasing pent up emotions  boosting relaxation and reminding them of happy times. it also allows singers to breathe more easily. patients with lung disease and chronic pulmonary disease experience relief from their symptoms from singing just two times a week. in addition to breathing related illness  singing also has numerous benefits for stroke victims when it comes to relearning the ability to speak and communicate by singing their thoughts. singing activates the right side of the brain when the left side cannot function (the left side is the area of the brain responsible for speech)  so
it is easy to see how singing can be an excellent alternative to speech while the victim heals.   == singing and language == every natural or non-natural language has its own intrinsic musicality which affects singing by means of pitch  phrasing and accent.   === neurological aspects === much research has been done recently on the link between music and language  especially singing. it is becoming increasingly clear that these two processes are very much alike  and yet also different. levitin describes how  beginning with the eardrum  sound waves are translated into pitch  or a tonotopic map  and then shortly thereafter  speech and music probably diverge into separate processing circuits  (130). there is evidence that neural circuits used for music and language may start out in infants undifferentiated. there are several areas of the brain that are used for both language and music. for example  brodmann area 47  which has been implicated in the processing of syntax in oral and sign languages  as well as musical syntax and semantic aspects of language. levitin recounts how in certain studies   listening to music and attending its syntactic features  similar to the syntactic processes in language  activated this part of the brain. in addition   musical syntax ... has been localized to ... areas adjacent to and overlapping with those regions that process speech syntax  such as broca s area  and  the regions involved in musical semantics ..  appear to be [localized] near wernicke s area.  both broca s area and wernicke s area are important steps in language processing and production. singing has been shown to help stroke victims recover speech. according to neurologist gottfried schlaug  there is a corresponding area to that of speech  which resides in the left hemisphere  on the right side of the brain. this is casually known as the  singing center.  by teaching stroke victims to sing their words  this can help train this area of the brain for speech. in support of this theory  levitin asserts that  regional specificity  such as that for speech   may be temporary  as the processing centers for important mental functions actually move to other regions after trauma or brain damage.  thus in the right hemisphere of the brain  the  singing center  may be retrained to help produce speech.   === accents and singing === the speaking dialect or accent of a person may differ greatly from the general singing accent that a person uses while singing. when people sing  they generally use the accent or neutral accent that is used in the style of music they are singing in  rather than a regional accent or dialect  the style of music and the popular center/region of the style has more influence on the singing accent of a person than where they come from. for example  in the english
language  british singers of rock or popular music often sing in an american accent or neutral accent instead of an english accent.   == singing animals == scholars agree that singing is strongly present in many different species. wide dispersal of singing behavior among very different animal species  like birds  gibbons  whales  and many others strongly suggests that singing appeared independently in different species. currently  there are about 5400 species of animals that are known to sing. at least some singing species demonstrate the ability to learn their songs  to improvise and even to compose new melodies. in some animal species singing is a group activity (see  for example  singing in gibbon families.)   == see also == list of multilingual bands and artists   === art music ===   === other music ===   === physiology === n-acylethanolamine (nae)   == references ==   == further reading == blackwood  alan. the performing world of the singer. london  hamish hamilton  1981. 113 p.  amply ill. (mostly with photos.). isbn 0-241-10588-9 reid  cornelius. a dictionary of vocal terminology  an analysis. new york  j. patelson music house  1983. xxi  457 p. n.b.   this dictionary has been prepared ... to define and [to] analyze those terms and expressions in common usage by the vocal profession from the early seventeenth century to the present  as well as those [terms and expressions] introduced ... by members of the various scientific disciplines concerned with the subject. —from the introd.  on p. xix. isbn 0-915282-07-0   == external links == a brief history of singing singing and health  a systematic mapping and review of non-clinical research
a composer (latin compōnō  literally  one who puts together ) is a musician who is an author of music in any form  including vocal music (for a singer or choir)  instrumental music  electronic music  and music which combines multiple forms. a composer may create music in any music genre  including  for example  classical music  musical theatre  blues  folk music  jazz  and popular music. composers often express their works in a written musical score using musical notation. many composers are  or were  also skilled performers of music.   == composers and performers == musical notation serves as a set of directions for a performer  but there is a whole continuum of possibilities concerning how much the performer determines the final form of the rendered work in performance.  even in a conventional western piece of instrumental music  in which all of the melodies  chords  and basslines are written out in musical notation  the performer has a degree of latitude to add artistic interpretation to the work  by such means as by varying his or her articulation and phrasing  choosing how long to make fermatas (held notes) or pauses  and — in the case of bowed string instruments  woodwinds or brass instruments — deciding whether to use expressive effects such as vibrato or portamento. for a singer or instrumental performer  the process of deciding how to perform music that has been previously composed and notated is termed  interpretation . different performers  interpretations of the same work of music can vary widely  in terms of the tempos that are chosen and the playing or singing style or phrasing of the melodies. composers and songwriters who present their own music are interpreting  just as much as those who perform the music of others. the standard body of choices and techniques present at a given time and a given place is referred to as performance practice  whereas interpretation is generally used to mean the individual choices of a performer.although a musical composition often has a single author  this is not always the case. a work of music can have multiple composers  which often occurs in popular music when a band collaborates to write a song  or in musical theatre  where the songs may be written by one person  the orchestration of the accompaniment parts and writing of the overture is done by an orchestrator  and the words may be written by a third person. a piece of music can also be composed with words  images  or  in the 20th and 21st century  computer programs that explain or notate how the singer or musician should create musical sounds. examples of this range from wind chimes jingling in a breeze  to avant-garde music from the 20th century that uses graphic notation  to text compositions such as aus den sieben tagen  to computer programs that
select sounds for musical pieces. music that makes heavy use of randomness and chance is called aleatoric music  and is associated with contemporary composers active in the 20th century  such as john cage  morton feldman  and witold lutosławski. the nature and means of individual variation of the music is varied  depending on the musical culture in the country and time period it was written. for instance  music composed in the baroque era  particularly in slow tempos  often was written in bare outline  with the expectation that the performer would add improvised ornaments to the melody line during a performance. such freedom generally diminished in later eras  correlating with the increased use by composers of more detailed scoring in the form of dynamics  articulation et cetera  composers becoming uniformly more explicit in how they wished their music to be interpreted  although how strictly and minutely these are dictated varies from one composer to another. because of this trend of composers becoming increasingly specific and detailed in their instructions to the performer  a culture eventually developed whereby faithfulness to the composer s written intention came to be highly valued (see  for example  urtext edition). this musical culture is almost certainly related to the high esteem (bordering on veneration) in which the leading classical composers are often held by performers. the historically informed performance movement has revived to some extent the possibility of the performer elaborating in a serious way the music as given in the score  particularly for baroque music and music from the early classical period. the movement might be considered a way of creating greater faithfulness to the original in works composed at a time that expected performers to improvise. in genres other than classical music  the performer generally has more freedom  thus for instance when a performer of western popular music creates a  cover  of an earlier song  there is little expectation of exact rendition of the original  nor is exact faithfulness necessarily highly valued (with the possible exception of  note-for-note  transcriptions of famous guitar solos). in western art music  the composer typically orchestrates his or her own compositions  but in musical theatre and in pop music  songwriters may hire an arranger to do the orchestration. in some cases  a pop songwriter may not use notation at all  and instead compose the song in his or her mind and then play or record it from memory. in jazz and popular music  notable recordings by influential performers are given the weight that written scores play in classical music. the study of composition has traditionally been dominated by examination of methods and practice of western classical music  but the definition of composition is broad enough the creation of popular and traditional music songs and instrumental pieces and to include spontaneously improvised works like those of free jazz performers and african percussionists such as ewe drummers.   == history == the
level of distinction between composers and other musicians varies  which affects issues such as copyright and the deference given to individual interpretations of a particular piece of music. in the development of european classical music  the function of composing music initially did not have much greater importance than that of performing it. the preservation of individual compositions did not receive enormous attention and musicians generally had no qualms about modifying compositions for performance. in as much as the role of the composer in western art music has seen continued solidification  in alternative idioms (i.e. jazz  experimental music) it has in some ways become increasingly complex or vague. for instance  in certain contexts the line between composer and performer  sound designer  arranger  producer  and other roles  can be quite blurred.  the term  composer  is often used to refer to composers of instrumental music  such as those found in classical  jazz or other forms of art and traditional music. in popular and folk music  the composer is usually called a songwriter  since the music generally takes the form of a song. since the mid-20th century  the term has expanded to accommodate creators of electroacoustic music  in which composers directly create sonic material in any of the various electronic media  such as reel-to-reel tape and electronic effects units  which may be presented to an audience by replaying a tape or other sound recording  or by having live instrumentalists and singers perform with prerecorded material. this is distinct from a 19th-century conception of instrumental composition  where the work was represented solely by a musical score to be interpreted by performers.   === ancient greece === music was an important part of social and cultural life in ancient greece. we know that composers wrote notated music during the ancient greek era because scholars have found the seikilos epitaph. the epitaph  written sometime between 200 bc and 100 ad  is the oldest surviving example of a complete musical composition  including musical notation  in the world. the song  the melody of which is recorded  alongside its lyrics  in the ancient greek musical notation  was found engraved on a tombstone  a stele  near aydın  turkey (not far from ephesus). it is a hellenistic ionic song in either the phrygian octave species or iastian tonos.   === middle ages ===  during the medieval music era (476 to 1400)  composers wrote monophonic (single melodic line) chanting into roman catholic church services. western music then started becoming more of an art form with the advances in music notation. the only european medieval repertory that survives from before about 800 is the monophonic liturgical plainsong of the roman catholic church  the central tradition of which was called gregorian chant. alongside these traditions of sacred and church music there existed a vibrant tradition of secular song (non-religious songs). examples of composers from this period are léonin
 pérotin and guillaume de machaut.   === renaissance ===  during the renaissance music era (c. 1400 to 1600) composers tended to focus more on writing songs about secular (non-religious) themes  such as courtly love. around 1450  the printing press was invented  which made printed sheet music much less expensive and easier to mass-produce (prior to the invention of the printing press  all notated music was hand-copied). the increased availability of sheet music helped to spread composers  musical styles more quickly and across a larger area. by the middle of the 15th century  composers were writing richly polyphonic sacred music  in which different melody lines were interwoven simultaneously. prominent composers from this era include guillaume dufay  giovanni pierluigi da palestrina  thomas morley  and orlande de lassus. as musical activity shifted from the church to the aristocratic courts  kings  queens and princes competed for the finest composers. many leading important composers came from the netherlands  belgium  and northern france. they are called the franco-flemish composers. they held important positions throughout europe  especially in italy. other countries with vibrant musical activity included germany  england  and spain.   === baroque === during the baroque era of music (1600 to 1750)  composers expanded the range and complexity of the music they were writing. the baroque music era began when composers looked back to ancient greek music for the inspiration to create operas (dramatic vocal music accompanied by orchestra). another key style of music composers used during this era was contrapuntal music. this style of writing required composers to have an advanced knowledge of music theory  as contrapuntal music involves multiple  independent melody lines played by instruments or sung by voices. there were strict counterpoint rules that composers had to learn. german baroque composers wrote for small ensembles including strings  brass  and woodwinds  as well as choirs and for keyboard instruments such as pipe organ  harpsichord  and clavichord. during this period  composers developed several major music forms that lasted into later periods when they were expanded and evolved further  including the fugue  the invention  the sonata  and the concerto. the late baroque style was polyphonically complex and richly ornamented. some of the best-known composers from the baroque era include claudio monteverdi  heinrich schütz  jean-baptiste lully  dieterich buxtehude  arcangelo corelli  henry purcell  françois couperin  antonio vivaldi  georg philipp telemann  jean-philippe rameau  johann sebastian bach and george frideric handel.   === classicism === composers of music of the classical period (1750 to 1830) looked to the art and philosophy of ancient greece and rome  to the ideals of balance  proportion and disciplined expression. apart from when writing religious works  composers moved towards writing in a lighter  clearer and considerably simpler texture  using instrumental melodies that tended to be almost voicelike and singable. new genres were developed by composers. the main
style was homophony  where a prominent melody and a subordinate chordal accompaniment part are clearly distinct. composers focused on instrumental music. it was dominated by further development of musical forms initially defined in the baroque period  the sonata  the concerto  and the symphony. others main kinds were the trio  string quartet  serenade and divertimento. the sonata was the most important and developed form. although baroque composers also wrote sonatas  the classical style of sonata is completely distinct. all of the main instrumental forms of the classical era  from string quartets to symphonies and concertos  were based on the structure of the sonata. one of the most important changes made in the classical period was the development of public concerts. the aristocracy still played a significant role in the sponsorship of concerts and compositions  but it was now possible for composers to survive without being permanent employees of queens or princes. the increasing popularity of classical music led to a growth in the number and types of orchestras. the expansion of orchestral concerts necessitated the building of large public performance spaces. symphonic music including symphonies  musical accompaniment to ballet and mixed vocal/instrumental genres such as opera and oratorio became more popular. the best known composers of classicism are joseph haydn  wolfgang amadeus mozart  ludwig van beethoven and franz schubert. beethoven and schubert are also considered to be composers in the later part of the classical era  as it began to move towards romanticism.   === romanticism === during the romantic music era (c. 1810 to 1900)  composers turned the rigid styles and forms of the classical era into more passionate  dramatic expressive pieces. composers attempted to increase emotional expression and power of their music  and they tried to describe deeper truths or human feelings. with symphonic tone poems  composers tried to tell stories and evoke images or landscapes using instrumental music. some composers promoted nationalistic pride with patriotic orchestral music inspired by folk music. for composers  the emotional and expressive qualities of music came to take precedence over following textbooks and tradition. romantic composers grew in idiosyncrasy  and went further in the syncretism of exploring different art-forms in a musical context  (such as literature)  history (historical figures and legends)  or nature itself. romantic love or longing was a prevalent theme in many works composed during this period. in some cases the formal structures from the classical period continued to be used (e.g.  the sonata form used in string quartets and symphonies)  but these forms were expanded and altered. in many cases  composers explored new approaches to use for existing genres  forms  and functions. also  composers created new forms that were deemed better suited to the new subject matter. opera and ballet continued to develop.in the years after 1800  the music developed by ludwig van beethoven and franz schubert introduced a more dramatic  expressive style. in beethoven s case  short motifs
 developed organically  came to replace melody as the most significant compositional unit (an example is the distinctive four note figure used in his fifth symphony). later romantic composers such as pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky  antonín dvořák  and gustav mahler used more unusual chords and more dissonance to create dramatic tension. they generated complex and often much longer musical works. during the late romantic period  composers explored dramatic chromatic alterations of tonality  such as extended chords and altered chords  which created new sound  colours . composers in the romantic era increased the size of the orchestra by adding players and using new instruments  creating a more powerful sound. some wagnerian orchestras included multiple harps  massive string sections and wagner tubas.   === 20th- and 21st-century music ===  in the 19th century  one of the key ways that new compositions became known to the public was by the sales of sheet music  which amateur music lovers would perform at home on their piano or other instruments. with 20th-century music  there was a vast increase in music listening as the radio gained popularity and phonographs were used to replay and distribute music. in the 20th century  contemporary classical composers were also influenced by the african-american improvisation-based jazz music. the jazz influence can be seen in third stream music and in the compositions of leonard bernstein. the focus of art music was characterized by exploration of new rhythms  styles  and sounds. igor stravinsky  arnold schoenberg  and john cage were all influential composers in 20th-century art music. cage wrote compositions for traditional classical instruments and unusual sound-producing devices not normally thought of as instruments  such as radios. the invention of sound recording and the ability to edit music on tape gave rise to new subgenre of classical music  including the acousmatic and musique concrète schools of electronic composition  in which composers made pieces using reel-to-reel tape recorders and electronic equipment.   == role of women ==  in 1993  american musicologist marcia citron asked  [w]hy is music composed by women so marginal to the standard  classical  repertoire  citron  examines the practices and attitudes that have led to the exclusion of women composers from the received  canon  of performed musical works.  she argues that in the 1800s  women composers typically wrote art songs for performance in small recitals rather than symphonies intended for performance with an orchestra in a large hall  with the latter works being seen as the most important genre for composers  since women composers did not write many symphonies  they were deemed to be not notable as composers.according to abbey philips   women musicians have had a very difficult time breaking through and getting the credit they deserve.  during the medieval eras  most of the art music was created for liturgical (religious) purposes and due to the views about the roles of women that were held
by religious leaders  few women composed this type of music  with the nun hildegard von bingen being among the exceptions. most university textbooks on the history of music discuss almost exclusively the role of male composers. as well  very few works by women composers are part of the standard repertoire of classical music. in concise oxford history of music  clara schumann is the only woman composer that is mentioned. philips states that  [d]uring the 20th century the women who were composing/playing gained far less attention than their male counterparts. women today are being taken more seriously in the realm of concert music  though the statistics of recognition  prizes  employment  and overall opportunities are still biased toward men.   == clustering == famous composers have a tendency to cluster in certain cities throughout history. based on over 12 000 prominent composers listed in grove music online and using word count measurement techniques  the most important cities for classical music can be quantitatively identified.paris has been the main hub for classical music in all periods. it was ranked fifth in the 15th and 16th centuries but first in the 17th to 20th centuries inclusive. london was the second most meaningful city  eighth in the 15th century  seventh in the 16th  fifth in the 17th  second in the 18th and 19th centuries  and fourth in the 20th century. rome topped the rankings in the 15th century  dropped to second in the 16th and 17th centuries  eighth in the 18th century  ninth in the 19th century but back at sixth in the 20th century. berlin appears in the top ten ranking only in the 18th century  and was ranked third most important city in both the 19th and 20th centuries. new york city entered the rankings in the 19th century (at fifth place) and stood at second rank in the 20th century. the patterns are very similar for a sample of 522 top composers.   == training == professional classical composers often have a background in performing classical music during their childhood and teens  either as a singer in a choir  as a player in a youth orchestra  or as a performer on a solo instrument (e.g.  piano  pipe organ  or violin). teens aspiring to be composers can continue their postsecondary studies in a variety of formal training settings  including colleges  conservatories  and universities. conservatories  which are the standard musical training system in france and in quebec (canada) provide lessons and amateur orchestral and choral singing experience for composition students. universities offer a range of composition programs  including bachelor s degrees  master of music degrees  and doctor of musical arts degrees. as well  there are a variety of other training programs such as classical summer camps and festivals  which give students the opportunity to get coaching from composers.   === undergraduate === bachelor s degrees in composition (referred to
as b.mus. or b.m) are four-year programs that include individual composition lessons  amateur orchestra/choral experience  and a sequence of courses in music history  music theory  and liberal arts courses (e.g.  english literature)  which give the student a more well-rounded education. usually  composition students must complete significant pieces or songs before graduating. not all composers hold a b.mus. in composition  composers may also hold a b.mus. in music performance or music theory.   === masters === master of music degrees (m.mus.) in composition consist of private lessons with a composition professor  ensemble experience  and graduate courses in music history and music theory  along with one or two concerts featuring the composition student s pieces. a master s degree in music (referred to as an m.mus. or m.m.) is often a required minimum credential for people who wish to teach composition at a university or conservatory. a composer with an m.mus. could be an adjunct professor or instructor at a university  but it would be difficult in the 2010s to obtain a tenure track professor position with this degree.   === doctoral === to become a tenure track professor  many universities require a doctoral degree. in composition  the key doctoral degree is the doctor of musical arts  rather than the phd  the phd is awarded in music  but typically for subjects such as musicology and music theory. doctor of musical arts (referred to as d.m.a.  dma  d.mus.a. or a.mus.d) degrees in composition provide an opportunity for advanced study at the highest artistic and pedagogical level  requiring usually an additional 54+ credit hours beyond a master s degree (which is about 30+ credits beyond a bachelor s degree). for this reason  admission is highly selective. students must submit examples of their compositions. if available  some schools will also accept video or audio recordings of performances of the student s pieces. examinations in music history  music theory  ear training/dictation  and an entrance examination are required. students must prepare significant compositions under the guidance of faculty composition professors. some schools require dma composition students to present concerts of their works  which are typically performed by singers or musicians from the school. the completion of advanced coursework and a minimum b average are other typical requirements of a d.m.a program. during a d.m.a. program  a composition student may get experience teaching undergraduate music students.   === other routes === some classical composers did not complete composition programs  but focused their studies on performance of voice or an instrument or on music theory  and developed their compositional skills over the course of a career in another musical occupation.   == employment == during the middle ages  most composers worked for the catholic church and composed music for religious services such as plainchant melodies. during the renaissance music era  composers typically worked for aristocratic employers. while aristocrats typically required composers to produce a significant amount
of religious music  such as masses  composers also penned many non-religious songs on the topic of courtly love  the respectful  reverential love of a great woman from afar. courtly love songs were very popular during the renaissance era. during the baroque music era  many composers were employed by aristocrats or as church employees. during the classical period  composers began to organize more public concerts for profit  which helped composers to be less dependent on aristocratic or church jobs. this trend continued in the romantic music era in the 19th century. in the 20th century  composers began to seek employment as professors in universities and conservatories. in the 20th century  composers also earned money from the sales of their works  such sheet music publications of their songs or pieces or as sound recordings of their works.   == see also == lists of composers kapellmeister   == references ==   == external links == composer societies at curlie composers at curlie composers and arrangers at curlie
piano player may refer to   pianist  who plays the piano piano player (album)  1998 album featuring jazz pianist bill evans the piano player (ramsey lewis album)  1970 the piano player (2002 film)  starring dennis hopper  christopher lambert & diane kruger the piano player (maksim mrvica album)  2003 the piano teacher (film) (french  la pianiste)  or the piano player  a 2001 film directed by michael haneke a player piano  or  automatic piano
the guitar is a fretted musical instrument that usually has six strings. it is typically played with both hands by strumming or plucking the strings with either a guitar pick or the finger(s)/fingernails of one hand  while simultaneously fretting (pressing the strings against the frets) with the fingers of the other hand. the sound of the vibrating strings is projected either acoustically  by means of the hollow chamber of the guitar (for an acoustic guitar)  or through an electrical amplifier and a speaker. the guitar is a type of chordophone  traditionally constructed from wood and strung with either gut  nylon or steel strings and distinguished from other chordophones by its construction and tuning. the modern guitar was preceded by the gittern  the vihuela  the four-course renaissance guitar  and the five-course baroque guitar  all of which contributed to the development of the modern six-string instrument. there are three main types of modern acoustic guitar  the classical guitar (spanish guitar/nylon-string guitar)  the steel-string acoustic guitar  and the archtop guitar  which is sometimes called a  jazz guitar . the tone of an acoustic guitar is produced by the strings  vibration  amplified by the hollow body of the guitar  which acts as a resonating chamber. the classical guitar is often played as a solo instrument using a comprehensive finger-picking technique where each string is plucked individually by the player s fingers  as opposed to being strummed. the term  finger-picking  can also refer to a specific tradition of folk  blues  bluegrass  and country guitar playing in the united states. the acoustic bass guitar is a low-pitched instrument that is one octave below a regular guitar. electric guitars  introduced in the 1930s  use an amplifier and a loudspeaker that both makes the sound of the instrument loud enough for the performers and audience to hear  and  given that it produces an electric signal when played  that can electronically manipulate and shape the tone using an equalizer (e.g.  bass and treble tone controls) and a huge variety of electronic effects units  the most commonly used ones being distortion (or  overdrive ) and reverb. early amplified guitars employed a hollow body  but solid wood guitars began to dominate during the 1960s and 1970s  as they are less prone to unwanted acoustic feedback  howls . as with acoustic guitars  there are a number of types of electric guitars  including hollowbody guitars  archtop guitars (used in jazz guitar  blues and rockabilly) and solid-body guitars  which are widely used in rock music. the loud  amplified sound and sonic power of the electric guitar played through a guitar amp has played a key role in the development of blues and rock music  both as an accompaniment instrument (playing riffs and chords) and performing guitar solos  and in many rock subgenres  notably heavy metal music and punk rock. the electric guitar has
had a major influence on popular culture. the guitar is used in a wide variety of musical genres worldwide. it is recognized as a primary instrument in genres such as blues  bluegrass  country  flamenco  folk  jazz  jota  mariachi  metal  punk  reggae  rock  soul  and pop.   == history ==  before the development of the electric guitar and the use of synthetic materials  a guitar was defined as being an instrument having  a long  fretted neck  flat wooden soundboard  ribs  and a flat back  most often with incurved sides.  the term is used to refer to a number of chordophones that were developed and used across europe  beginning in the 12th century and  later  in the americas. a 3 300-year-old stone carving of a hittite bard playing a stringed instrument is the oldest iconographic representation of a chordophone and clay plaques from babylonia show people playing an instrument that has a strong resemblance to the guitar  indicating a possible babylonian origin for the guitar.the modern word guitar  and its antecedents  has been applied to a wide variety of chordophones since classical times and as such causes confusion. the english word guitar  the german gitarre  and the french guitare were all adopted from the spanish guitarra  which comes from the andalusian arabic قيثارة (qīthārah) and the latin cithara  which in turn came from the ancient greek κιθάρα. kithara appears in the bible four times (1 cor. 14 7  rev. 5 8  14 2 and 15 2)  and is usually translated into english as harp. many influences are cited as antecedents to the modern guitar. although the development of the earliest  guitars  is lost in the history of medieval spain  two instruments are commonly cited as their most influential predecessors  the european lute and its cousin  the four-string oud  the latter was brought to iberia by the moors in the 8th century.at least two instruments called  guitars  were in use in spain by 1200  the guitarra latina (latin guitar) and the so-called guitarra morisca (moorish guitar). the guitarra morisca had a rounded back  wide fingerboard  and several sound holes. the guitarra latina had a single sound hole and a narrower neck. by the 14th century the qualifiers  moresca  or  morisca  and  latina  had been dropped  and these two cordophones were simply referred to as guitars.the spanish vihuela  called in italian the  viola da mano  a guitar-like instrument of the 15th and 16th centuries  is widely considered to have been the single most important influence in the development of the baroque guitar. it had six courses (usually)  lute-like tuning in fourths and a guitar-like body  although early representations reveal an instrument with a sharply cut waist. it was also larger than the contemporary four-course guitars. by
the 16th century  the vihuela s construction had more in common with the modern guitar  with its curved one-piece ribs  than with the viols  and more like a larger version of the contemporary four-course guitars. the vihuela enjoyed only a relatively short period of popularity in spain and italy during an era dominated elsewhere in europe by the lute  the last surviving published music for the instrument appeared in 1576.meanwhile  the five-course baroque guitar  which was documented in spain from the middle of the 16th century  enjoyed popularity  especially in spain  italy and france from the late 16th century to the mid-18th century. in portugal  the word viola referred to the guitar  as guitarra meant the  portuguese guitar  a variety of cittern. there were many different plucked instruments  that were being invented and used in europe  during the middle ages. by the 16th century  most of the forms of guitar had fallen off  to never be seen again. however  midway through the 16th century  the five-course guitar  was established. it was not a straightforward process. there were two types of five-course guitars  they differed in the location of the major third and in the interval pattern. the fifth course can be placed on the instrument  because it was known to play seventeen notes or more. because the guitar had a fifth string  it was capable of playing that amount of notes. the guitars strings were tuned in unison  so  in other words  it was tuned by placing a finger on the second fret of the thinnest string and tuning the guitar  bottom to top. the strings were a whole octave apart from one another  which is the reason for the different method of tuning. because it was such so different  there was major controversy as to who created the five course guitar. a literary source  lope de vega s dorotea  gives the credit to the poet and musician vicente espinel. this claim was also repeated by nicolas doizi de velasco in 1640  however this claim has been refuted by others who state that espinel s birth year (1550) make it impossible for him to be responsible for the tradition. he believed that the tuning was the reason the instrument became known as the spanish guitar in italy. even later  in the same century  gaspar sanz wrote that other nations such as italy or france added to the spanish guitar. all of these nations even imitated the five-course guitar by  recreating  their own.finally  circa 1850  the form and structure of the modern guitar is credited to spanish guitar maker antonio torres jurado  who increased the size of the guitar body  altered its proportions  and invented the breakthrough fan-braced pattern. bracing  which refers to the internal pattern of wood reinforcements used to secure the guitar s top and back and prevent
the instrument from collapsing under tension  is an important factor in how the guitar sounds. torres  design greatly improved the volume  tone  and projection of the instrument  and it has remained essentially unchanged since.   == types ==  guitars can be divided into two broad categories  acoustic and electric guitars. within each of these categories  there are also further sub-categories. for example  an electric guitar can be purchased in a six-string model (the most common model) or in seven or 12-string models.   === acoustic ===  acoustic guitars form several notable subcategories within the acoustic guitar group  classical and flamenco guitars  steel-string guitars  which include the flat-topped  or  folk  guitar  twelve-string guitars  and the arched-top guitar. the acoustic guitar group also includes unamplified guitars designed to play in different registers  such as the acoustic bass guitar  which has a similar tuning to that of the electric bass guitar.   ==== renaissance and baroque ====  renaissance and baroque guitars are the ancestors of the modern classical and flamenco guitar. they are substantially smaller  more delicate in construction  and generate less volume. the strings are paired in courses as in a modern 12-string guitar  but they only have four or five courses of strings rather than six single strings normally used now. they were more often used as rhythm instruments in ensembles than as solo instruments  and can often be seen in that role in early music performances. (gaspar sanz s instrucción de música sobre la guitarra española of 1674 contains his whole output for the solo guitar.) renaissance and baroque guitars are easily distinguished  because the renaissance guitar is very plain and the baroque guitar is very ornate  with ivory or wood inlays all over the neck and body  and a paper-cutout inverted  wedding cake  inside the hole.   ==== classical ====  classical guitars  also known as  spanish  guitars  are typically strung with nylon strings  plucked with the fingers  played in a seated position and are used to play a diversity of musical styles including classical music. the classical guitar s wide  flat neck allows the musician to play scales  arpeggios  and certain chord forms more easily and with less adjacent string interference than on other styles of guitar. flamenco guitars are very similar in construction  but they are associated with a more percussive tone. in portugal  the same instrument is often used with steel strings particularly in its role within fado music. the guitar is called viola  or violão in brazil  where it is often used with an extra seventh string by choro musicians to provide extra bass support. in mexico  the popular mariachi band includes a range of guitars  from the small requinto to the guitarrón  a guitar larger than a cello  which is tuned in the bass register.
in colombia  the traditional quartet includes a range of instruments too  from the small bandola (sometimes known as the deleuze-guattari  for use when traveling or in confined rooms or spaces)  to the slightly larger tiple  to the full-sized classical guitar. the requinto also appears in other latin-american countries as a complementary member of the guitar family  with its smaller size and scale  permitting more projection for the playing of single-lined melodies. modern dimensions of the classical instrument were established by the spaniard antonio de torres jurado (1817–1892).   ==== flat-top ====  flat-top or steel-string guitars are similar to the classical guitar  however  within the varied sizes of the steel-stringed guitar the body size is usually significantly larger than a classical guitar  and has a narrower  reinforced neck and stronger structural design. the robust x-bracing typical of the steel-string was developed in the 1840s by german-american luthiers  of whom christian friedrich  c. f.  martin is the best known. originally used on gut-strung instruments  the strength of the system allowed the guitar to withstand the additional tension of steel strings when this fortunate combination arose in the early 20th century. the steel strings produce a brighter tone  and according to many players  a louder sound. the acoustic guitar is used in many kinds of music including folk  country  bluegrass  pop  jazz  and blues. many variations are possible from the roughly classical-sized oo and parlour to the large dreadnought (the most commonly available type) and jumbo. ovation makes a modern variation  with a rounded back/side assembly molded from artificial materials.   ==== archtop ====  archtop guitars are steel-string instruments in which the top (and often the back) of the instrument are carved  from a solid billet  into a curved  rather than a flat  shape. this violin-like construction is usually credited to the american orville gibson. lloyd loar of the gibson mandolin-guitar mfg. co introduced the violin-inspired  f -shaped hole design now usually associated with archtop guitars  after designing a style of mandolin of the same type. the typical archtop guitar has a large  deep  hollow body whose form is much like that of a mandolin or a violin-family instrument. nowadays  most archtops are equipped with magnetic pickups  and they are therefore both acoustic and electric. f-hole archtop guitars were immediately adopted  upon their release  by both jazz and country musicians  and have remained particularly popular in jazz music  usually with flatwound strings.   ==== resonator  resophonic or dobros ====  all three principal types of resonator guitars were invented by the slovak-american john dopyera (1893–1988) for the national and dobro (dopyera brothers) companies. similar to the flat top guitar in appearance  but with a body that may be made of brass  nickel-silver  or steel as well as wood  the sound of the resonator guitar is produced by one
or more aluminum resonator cones mounted in the middle of the top. the physical principle of the guitar is therefore similar to the loudspeaker. the original purpose of the resonator was to produce a very loud sound  this purpose has been largely superseded by electrical amplification  but the resonator guitar is still played because of its distinctive tone. resonator guitars may have either one or three resonator cones. the method of transmitting sound resonance to the cone is either a  biscuit  bridge  made of a small piece of hardwood at the vertex of the cone (nationals)  or a  spider  bridge  made of metal and mounted around the rim of the (inverted) cone (dobros). three-cone resonators always use a specialized metal bridge. the type of resonator guitar with a neck with a square cross-section—called  square neck  or  hawaiian —is usually played face up  on the lap of the seated player  and often with a metal or glass slide. the round neck resonator guitars are normally played in the same fashion as other guitars  although slides are also often used  especially in blues.   ==== twelve-string ====  the twelve-string guitar usually has steel strings  and it is widely used in folk music  blues  and rock and roll. rather than having only six strings  the 12-string guitar has six courses made up of two strings each  like a mandolin or lute. the highest two courses are tuned in unison  while the others are tuned in octaves. the 12-string guitar is also made in electric forms. the chime-like sound of the 12-string electric guitar was the basis of jangle pop.   ==== acoustic bass ====  the acoustic bass guitar is a bass instrument with a hollow wooden body similar to  though usually somewhat larger than  that of a 6-string acoustic guitar. like the traditional electric bass guitar and the double bass  the acoustic bass guitar commonly has four strings  which are normally tuned e-a-d-g  an octave below the lowest four strings of the 6-string guitar  which is the same tuning pitch as an electric bass guitar. it can  more rarely  be found with 5 or 6 strings  which provides a wider range of notes to be played with less movement up and down the neck.   === electric ===  electric guitars can have solid  semi-hollow  or hollow bodies  solid bodies produce little sound without amplification. electromagnetic pickups  and sometimes piezoelectric pickups  convert the vibration of the steel strings into signals  which are fed to an amplifier through a patch cable or radio transmitter. the sound is frequently modified by other electronic devices (effects units) or the natural distortion of valves (vacuum tubes) or the pre-amp in the amplifier. there are two main types of magnetic pickups  single- and double-coil (or humbucker)  each of which can be passive or active. the electric
guitar is used extensively in jazz  blues  r & b  and rock and roll. the first successful magnetic pickup for a guitar was invented by george beauchamp  and incorporated into the 1931 ro-pat-in (later rickenbacker)  frying pan  lap steel  other manufacturers  notably gibson  soon began to install pickups in archtop models. after world war ii the completely solid-body electric was popularized by gibson in collaboration with les paul  and independently by leo fender of fender music. the lower fretboard action (the height of the strings from the fingerboard)  lighter (thinner) strings  and its electrical amplification lend the electric guitar to techniques less frequently used on acoustic guitars. these include tapping  extensive use of legato through pull-offs and hammer-ons (also known as slurs)  pinch harmonics  volume swells  and use of a tremolo arm or effects pedals. some electric guitar models feature piezoelectric pickups  which function as transducers to provide a sound closer to that of an acoustic guitar with the flip of a switch or knob  rather than switching guitars. those that combine piezoelectric pickups and magnetic pickups are sometimes known as hybrid guitars.hybrids of acoustic and electric guitars are also common. there are also more exotic varieties  such as guitars with two  three  or rarely four necks  all manner of alternate string arrangements  fretless fingerboards (used almost exclusively on bass guitars  meant to emulate the sound of a stand-up bass)  5.1 surround guitar  and such.   ==== seven-string and eight-string ====  solid body seven-string guitars were popularized in the 1980s and 1990s. other artists go a step further  by using an eight-string guitar with two extra low strings. although the most common seven-string has a low b string  roger mcguinn (of the byrds and rickenbacker) uses an octave g string paired with the regular g string as on a 12-string guitar  allowing him to incorporate chiming 12-string elements in standard six-string playing. in 1982 uli jon roth developed the  sky guitar  with a vastly extended number of frets  which was the first guitar to venture into the upper registers of the violin. roth s seven-string and  mighty wing  guitar features a wider octave range.   ==== electric bass ====  the bass guitar (also called an  electric bass  or simply a  bass ) is similar in appearance and construction to an electric guitar  but with a longer neck and scale length  and four to six strings. the four-string bass  by far the most common  is usually tuned the same as the double bass  which corresponds to pitches one octave lower than the four lowest pitched strings of a guitar (e  a  d  and g). the bass guitar is a transposing instrument  as it is notated in bass clef an octave higher than it sounds (as is the double bass) to avoid excessive ledger
lines being required below the staff. like the electric guitar  the bass guitar has pickups and it is plugged into an amplifier and speaker for live performances.   == construction ==   === handedness ===  modern guitars can be constructed to suit both left- and right-handed players. normally  the dominant hand (in most people  the right hand) is used to pluck or strum the strings. this is similar to the convention of the violin family of instruments where the right hand controls the bow. left-handed players sometimes choose an opposite-handed (mirror) instrument  although some play in a standard-handed manner  others play a standard-handed guitar reversed  and still others (for example jimi hendrix) played a standard-handed guitar strung in reverse. this last configuration differs from a true opposite handed guitar in that the saddle is normally angled in such a way that the bass strings are slightly longer than the treble strings to improve intonation. reversing the strings  therefore  reverses the relative orientation of the saddle  adversely affecting intonation  although in hendrix s case  this is believed to have been an important element in his unique sound.   === components ===   ==== head ====  the headstock is located at the end of the guitar neck farthest from the body. it is fitted with machine heads that adjust the tension of the strings  which in turn affects the pitch. the traditional tuner layout is  3+3  in which each side of the headstock has three tuners (such as on gibson les pauls). in this layout  the headstocks are commonly symmetrical. many guitars feature other layouts  including six-in-line tuners (featured on fender stratocasters) or even  4+2  (e.g. ernie ball music man). some guitars (such as steinbergers) do not have headstocks at all  in which case the tuning machines are located elsewhere  either on the body or the bridge. the nut is a small strip of bone  plastic  brass  corian  graphite  stainless steel  or other medium-hard material  at the joint where the headstock meets the fretboard. its grooves guide the strings onto the fretboard  giving consistent lateral string placement. it is one of the endpoints of the strings  vibrating length. it must be accurately cut  or it can contribute to tuning problems due to string slippage or string buzz. to reduce string friction in the nut  which can adversely affect tuning stability  some guitarists fit a roller nut. some instruments use a zero fret just in front of the nut. in this case the nut is used only for lateral alignment of the strings  the string height and length being dictated by the zero fret.   ==== neck ====  a guitar s frets  fretboard  tuners  headstock  and truss rod  all attached to a long wooden extension  collectively constitute its neck. the wood used to make the fretboard usually differs
from the wood in the rest of the neck. the bending stress on the neck is considerable  particularly when heavier gauge strings are used (see tuning)  and the ability of the neck to resist bending (see truss rod) is important to the guitar s ability to hold a constant pitch during tuning or when strings are fretted. the rigidity of the neck with respect to the body of the guitar is one determinant of a good instrument versus a poor-quality one.  the shape of the neck (from a cross-sectional perspective) can also vary  from a gentle  c  curve to a more pronounced  v  curve. there are many different types of neck profiles available  giving the guitarist many options. some aspects to consider in a guitar neck may be the overall width of the fretboard  scale (distance between the frets)  the neck wood  the type of neck construction (for example  the neck may be glued in or bolted on)  and the shape (profile) of the back of the neck. other types of material used to make guitar necks are graphite (steinberger guitars)  aluminum (kramer guitars  travis bean and veleno guitars)  or carbon fiber (modulus guitars and threeguitars). double neck electric guitars have two necks  allowing the musician to quickly switch between guitar sounds. the neck joint or heel is the point at which the neck is either bolted or glued to the body of the guitar. almost all acoustic steel-string guitars  with the primary exception of taylors  have glued (otherwise known as set) necks  while electric guitars are constructed using both types. most classical guitars have a neck and headblock carved from one piece of wood  known as a  spanish heel.  commonly used set neck joints include mortise and tenon joints (such as those used by c. f. martin & co.)  dovetail joints (also used by c. f. martin on the d-28 and similar models) and spanish heel neck joints  which are named after the shoe they resemble and commonly found in classical guitars. all three types offer stability. bolt-on necks  though they are historically associated with cheaper instruments  do offer greater flexibility in the guitar s set-up  and allow easier access for neck joint maintenance and repairs. another type of neck  only available for solid body electric guitars  is the neck-through-body construction. these are designed so that everything from the machine heads down to the bridge are located on the same piece of wood. the sides (also known as wings) of the guitar are then glued to this central piece. some luthiers prefer this method of construction as they claim it allows better sustain of each note. some instruments may not have a neck joint at all  having the neck and sides built as one piece and the body built around it. the fingerboard  also called the fretboard  is a piece of wood embedded with metal frets that
comprises the top of the neck. it is flat on classical guitars and slightly curved crosswise on acoustic and electric guitars. the curvature of the fretboard is measured by the fretboard radius  which is the radius of a hypothetical circle of which the fretboard s surface constitutes a segment. the smaller the fretboard radius  the more noticeably curved the fretboard is. most modern guitars feature a 12  neck radius  while older guitars from the 1960s and 1970s usually feature a 6-8  neck radius. pinching a string against a fret on fretboard effectively shortens the vibrating length of the string  producing a higher pitch. fretboards are most commonly made of rosewood  ebony  maple  and sometimes manufactured using composite materials such as hpl or resin. see the section  neck  below for the importance of the length of the fretboard in connection to other dimensions of the guitar. the fingerboard plays an essential role in the treble tone for acoustic guitars. the quality of vibration of the fingerboard is the principal characteristic for generating the best treble tone. for that reason  ebony wood is better  but because of high use  ebony has become rare and extremely expensive. most guitar manufacturers have adopted rosewood instead of ebony.   ===== frets ===== almost all guitars have frets  which are metal strips (usually nickel alloy or stainless steel) embedded along the fretboard and located at exact points that divide the scale length in accordance with a specific mathematical formula. the exceptions include fretless bass guitars and very rare fretless guitars. pressing a string against a fret determines the strings  vibrating length and therefore its resultant pitch. the pitch of each consecutive fret is defined at a half-step interval on the chromatic scale. standard classical guitars have 19 frets and electric guitars between 21 and 24 frets  although guitars have been made with as many as 27 frets. frets are laid out to accomplish an equal tempered division of the octave. each set of twelve frets represents an octave. the twelfth fret divides the scale length exactly into two halves  and the 24th fret position divides one of those halves in half again. the ratio of the spacing of two consecutive frets is                                                 2                            12                                                  {\displaystyle
{\sqrt[{12}]{2}}}    (twelfth root of two). in practice  luthiers determine fret positions using the constant 17.817—an approximation to 1/(1-1/                                                2                            12                                                  {\displaystyle {\sqrt[{12}]{2}}}   ). if the nth fret is a distance x from the bridge  then the distance from the (n+1)th fret to the bridge is x-(x/17.817). frets are available in several different gauges and can be fitted according to player preference. among these are  jumbo  frets  which have much thicker gauge  allowing for use of a slight vibrato technique from pushing the string down harder and softer.  scalloped  fretboards  where the wood of the fretboard itself is  scooped out  between the frets  allow a dramatic vibrato effect. fine frets  much flatter  allow a very low string-action  but require that other conditions  such as curvature of the neck  be well-maintained to prevent buzz.   ===== truss rod ===== the truss rod is a thin  strong metal rod that runs along the inside of the neck. it is used to correct changes to the neck s curvature caused by aging of the neck timbers  changes in humidity  or to compensate for changes in the tension of strings. the tension of the rod and neck assembly is adjusted by a hex nut or an allen-key bolt on the rod  usually located either at the headstock  sometimes under a cover  or just inside the body of the guitar underneath the fretboard and accessible through the sound hole. some truss rods can only be accessed by removing the neck. the truss rod counteracts the immense amount of tension the strings place on the neck  bringing the neck back to a straighter position. turning the truss rod clockwise tightens it  counteracting the tension of the strings and straightening the neck or creating a backward bow. turning the truss rod counter-clockwise loosens it  allowing string tension to act on the neck and creating a forward bow. adjusting the truss rod affects the intonation of a guitar as well as the height of the strings from the fingerboard  called the action. some truss rod systems  called double action truss systems  tighten both ways  pushing the neck both forward and backward (standard
truss rods can only release to a point beyond which the neck is no longer compressed and pulled backward). the artist and luthier irving sloane pointed out  in his book steel-string guitar construction  that truss rods are intended primarily to remedy concave bowing of the neck  but cannot correct a neck with  back bow  or one that has become twisted. classical guitars do not require truss rods  as their nylon strings exert a lower tensile force with lesser potential to cause structural problems. however  their necks are often reinforced with a strip of harder wood  such as an ebony strip that runs down the back of a cedar neck. there is no tension adjustment on this form of reinforcement.   ===== inlays ===== inlays are visual elements set into the exterior surface of a guitar  both for decoration and artistic purposes and  in the case of the markings on the 3rd  5th  7th and 12th fret (and in higher octaves)  to provide guidance to the performer about the location of frets on the instrument. the typical locations for inlay are on the fretboard  headstock  and on acoustic guitars around the soundhole  known as the rosette. inlays range from simple plastic dots on the fretboard to intricate works of art covering the entire exterior surface of a guitar (front and back). some guitar players have used leds in the fretboard to produce unique lighting effects onstage. fretboard inlays are most commonly shaped like dots  diamond shapes  parallelograms  or large blocks in between the frets. dots are usually inlaid into the upper edge of the fretboard in the same positions  small enough to be visible only to the player. these usually appear on the odd numbered frets  but also on the 12th fret (the one octave mark) instead of the 11th and 13th frets. some older or high-end instruments have inlays made of mother of pearl  abalone  ivory  colored wood or other exotic materials and designs. simpler inlays are often made of plastic or painted. high-end classical guitars seldom have fretboard inlays as a well-trained player is expected to know his or her way around the instrument. in addition to fretboard inlay  the headstock and soundhole surround are also frequently inlaid. the manufacturer s logo or a small design is often inlaid into the headstock. rosette designs vary from simple concentric circles to delicate fretwork mimicking the historic rosette of lutes. bindings that edge the finger and sound boards are sometimes inlaid. some instruments have a filler strip running down the length and behind the neck  used for strength or to fill the cavity through which the truss rod was installed in the neck.   ==== body ====  in acoustic guitars  string vibration is transmitted through the bridge and saddle to the body via sound board. the sound board is typically made of tone woods such as spruce or cedar. timbers for tone woods
are chosen for both strength and ability to transfer mechanical energy from the strings to the air within the guitar body. sound is further shaped by the characteristics of the guitar body s resonant cavity. in expensive instruments  the entire body is made of wood. in inexpensive instruments  the back may be made of plastic. in an acoustic instrument  the body of the guitar is a major determinant of the overall sound quality. the guitar top  or soundboard  is a finely crafted and engineered element made of tonewoods such as spruce and red cedar. this thin piece of wood  often only 2 or 3 mm thick  is strengthened by differing types of internal bracing. many luthiers consider the top the dominant factor in determining the sound quality. the majority of the instrument s sound is heard through the vibration of the guitar top as the energy of the vibrating strings is transferred to it. the body of an acoustic guitar has a sound hole through which sound projects. the sound hole is usually a round hole in the top of the guitar under the strings. air inside the body vibrates as the guitar top and body is vibrated by the strings  and the response of the air cavity at different frequencies is characterized  like the rest of the guitar body  by a number of resonance modes at which it responds more strongly. the top  back and ribs of an acoustic guitar body are very thin (1–2 mm)  so a flexible piece of wood called lining is glued into the corners where the rib meets the top and back. this interior reinforcement provides 5 to 20 mm of solid gluing area for these corner joints. solid linings are often used in classical guitars  while kerfed lining is most often found in steel string acoustics. kerfed lining is also called kerfing because it is scored  or  kerfed (incompletely sawn through)  to allow it to bend with the shape of the rib). during final construction  a small section of the outside corners is carved or routed out and filled with binding material on the outside corners and decorative strips of material next to the binding  which are called purfling. this binding serves to seal off the end grain of the top and back. purfling can also appear on the back of an acoustic guitar  marking the edge joints of the two or three sections of the back. binding and purfling materials are generally made of either wood or plastic. body size  shape and style has changed over time. 19th century guitars  now known as salon guitars  were smaller than modern instruments. differing patterns of internal bracing have been used over time by luthiers. torres  hauser  ramirez  fleta  and c. f. martin were among the most influential designers of their time. bracing not only strengthens the top against potential collapse due to the stress exerted by the tensioned strings 
but also affects the resonance characteristics of the top. the back and sides are made out of a variety of timbers such as mahogany  indian rosewood and highly regarded brazilian rosewood (dalbergia nigra). each one is primarily chosen for their aesthetic effect and can be decorated with inlays and purfling. instruments with larger areas for the guitar top were introduced by martin in an attempt to create greater volume levels. the popularity of the larger  dreadnought  body size amongst acoustic performers is related to the greater sound volume produced. most electric guitar bodies are made of wood and include a plastic pick guard. boards wide enough to use as a solid body are very expensive due to the worldwide depletion of hardwood stock since the 1970s  so the wood is rarely one solid piece. most bodies are made from two pieces of wood with some of them including a seam running down the center line of the body. the most common woods used for electric guitar body construction include maple  basswood  ash  poplar  alder  and mahogany. many bodies consist of good-sounding  but inexpensive woods  like ash  with a  top  or thin layer of another  more attractive wood (such as maple with a natural  flame  pattern) glued to the top of the basic wood. guitars constructed like this are often called  flame tops . the body is usually carved or routed to accept the other elements  such as the bridge  pickup  neck  and other electronic components. most electrics have a polyurethane or nitrocellulose lacquer finish. other alternative materials to wood are used in guitar body construction. some of these include carbon composites  plastic material  such as polycarbonate  and aluminum alloys. the main purpose of the bridge on an acoustic guitar is to transfer the vibration from the strings to the soundboard  which vibrates the air inside of the guitar  thereby amplifying the sound produced by the strings. on all electric  acoustic and original guitars  the bridge holds the strings in place on the body. there are many varied bridge designs. there may be some mechanism for raising or lowering the bridge saddles to adjust the distance between the strings and the fretboard (action)  or fine-tuning the intonation of the instrument. some are spring-loaded and feature a  whammy bar  a removable arm that lets the player modulate the pitch by changing the tension on the strings. the whammy bar is sometimes also called a  tremolo bar . (the effect of rapidly changing pitch is properly called  vibrato . see tremolo for further discussion of this term.) some bridges also allow for alternate tunings at the touch of a button. on almost all modern electric guitars  the bridge has saddles that are adjustable for each string so that intonation stays correct up and down the neck. if the open string is in tune  but sharp or flat when frets
are pressed  the bridge saddle position can be adjusted with a screwdriver or hex key to remedy the problem. in general  flat notes are corrected by moving the saddle forward and sharp notes by moving it backwards. on an instrument correctly adjusted for intonation  the actual length of each string from the nut to the bridge saddle is slightly  but measurably longer than the scale length of the instrument. this additional length is called compensation  which flattens all notes a bit to compensate for the sharping of all fretted notes caused by stretching the string during fretting. the saddle of a guitar refers to the part of the bridge that physically supports the strings. it may be one piece (typically on acoustic guitars) or separate pieces  one for each string (electric guitars and basses). the saddle s basic purpose is to provide the end point for the string s vibration at the correct location for proper intonation  and on acoustic guitars to transfer the vibrations through the bridge into the top wood of the guitar. saddles are typically made of plastic or bone for acoustic guitars  though synthetics and some exotic animal tooth variations (e.g. fossilized tooth  ivory  etc. ) have become popular with some players. electric guitar saddles are typically metal  though some synthetic saddles are available. the pickguard  also known as the scratchplate  is usually a piece of laminated plastic or other material that protects the finish of the top of the guitar from damage due to the use of a plectrum ( pick ) or fingernails. electric guitars sometimes mount pickups and electronics on the pickguard. it is a common feature on steel-string acoustic guitars. some performance styles that use the guitar as a percussion instrument (tapping the top or sides between notes  etc.)  such as flamenco  require that a scratchplate or pickguard be fitted to nylon-string instruments.   ==== strings ====  the standard guitar has six strings  but four-  seven-  eight-  nine-  ten-  eleven-  twelve-  thirteen- and eighteen-string guitars are also available. classical and flamenco guitars historically used gut strings  but these have been superseded by polymer materials  such as nylon and fluorocarbon. modern guitar strings are constructed from metal  polymers  or animal or plant product materials. instruments utilizing  steel  strings may have strings made from alloys incorporating steel  nickel or phosphor bronze. bass strings for both instruments are wound rather than monofilament.   ==== pickups and electronics ====  pickups are transducers attached to a guitar that detect (or  pick up ) string vibrations and convert the mechanical energy of the string into electrical energy. the resultant electrical signal can then be electronically amplified. the most common type of pickup is electromagnetic in design. these contain magnets that are within a coil  or coils  of copper wire. such pickups are usually placed directly underneath the guitar strings. electromagnetic pickups work
on the same principles and in a similar manner to an electric generator. the vibration of the strings creates a small electric current in the coils surrounding the magnets. this signal current is carried to a guitar amplifier that drives a loudspeaker. traditional electromagnetic pickups are either single-coil or double-coil. single-coil pickups are susceptible to noise induced by stray electromagnetic fields  usually mains-frequency (60 or 50 hertz) hum. the introduction of the double-coil humbucker in the mid-1950s solved this problem through the use of two coils  one of which is wired in opposite polarity to cancel or  buck  stray fields. the types and models of pickups used can greatly affect the tone of the guitar. typically  humbuckers  which are two magnet-coil assemblies attached to each other  are traditionally associated with a heavier sound. single-coil pickups  one magnet wrapped in copper wire  are used by guitarists seeking a brighter  twangier sound with greater dynamic range. modern pickups are tailored to the sound desired. a commonly applied approximation used in selection of a pickup is that less wire (lower electrical impedance) gives brighter sound  more wire gives a  fat  tone. other options include specialized switching that produces coil-splitting  in/out of phase and other effects. guitar circuits are either active  needing a battery to power their circuit  or  as in most cases  equipped with a passive circuit. fender stratocaster-type guitars generally utilize three single-coil pickups  while most gibson les paul types use humbucker pickups. piezoelectric  or piezo  pickups represent another class of pickup. these employ piezoelectricity to generate the musical signal and are popular in hybrid electro-acoustic guitars. a crystal is located under each string  usually in the saddle. when the string vibrates  the shape of the crystal is distorted  and the stresses associated with this change produce tiny voltages across the crystal that can be amplified and manipulated. piezo pickups usually require a powered pre-amplifier to lift their output to match that of electromagnetic pickups. power is typically delivered by an on-board battery. most pickup-equipped guitars feature onboard controls  such as volume or tone  or pickup selection. at their simplest  these consist of passive components  such as potentiometers and capacitors  but may also include specialized integrated circuits or other active components requiring batteries for power  for preamplification and signal processing  or even for electronic tuning. in many cases  the electronics have some sort of shielding to prevent pickup of external interference and noise. guitars may be shipped or retrofitted with a hexaphonic pickup  which produces a separate output for each string  usually from a discrete piezoelectric or magnetic pickup. this arrangement lets on-board or external electronics process the strings individually for modeling or musical instrument digital interface (midi) conversion. roland makes  gk  hexaphonic pickups for guitar and bass  and a line of guitar modeling and synthesis products. line 6 s hexaphonic-equipped variax guitars use on-board electronics to
model the sound after various vintage instruments  and vary pitch on individual strings. midi converters use a hexaphonic guitar signal to determine pitch  duration  attack  and decay characteristics. the midi sends the note information to an internal or external sound bank device. the resulting sound closely mimics numerous instruments. the midi setup can also let the guitar be used as a game controller (i.e.  rock band squier) or as an instructional tool  as with the fretlight guitar.   == tuning ==  notationally  the guitar is considered a transposing instrument. its pitch sounds one octave lower than it is notated on a score.   === standard ===  a variety of tunings may be used. the most common tuning  known as  standard tuning  has the strings tuned from a low e  to a high e  traversing a two octave range—eadgbe. when all strings are played open the resulting chord is an em7/add11. the pitches are as follows   the table below shows a pitch s name found over the six strings of a guitar in standard tuning  from the nut (zero)  to the twelfth fret.  for four strings  the 5th fret on one string is the same open-note as the next string  for example  a 5th-fret note on the sixth string is the same note as the open fifth string. however  between the second and third strings  an irregularity occurs  the 4th-fret note on the third string is equivalent to the open second string.   === alternative ===  standard tuning has evolved to provide a good compromise between simple fingering for many chords and the ability to play common scales with reasonable left-hand movement. there are also a variety of commonly used alternative tunings  for example  the classes of open  regular  and dropped tunings.  open tuning refers to a guitar tuned so that strumming the open strings produces a chord  typically a major chord. the base chord consists of at least 3 notes and may include all the strings or a subset. the tuning is named for the open chord  open d  open g  and open a are popular tunings. all similar chords in the chromatic scale can then be played by barring a single fret. open tunings are common in blues music and folk music  and they are used in the playing of slide and bottleneck guitars. many musicians use open tunings when playing slide guitar.for the standard tuning  there is exactly one interval of a major third between the second and third strings  and all the other intervals are fourths. the irregularity has a price – chords cannot be shifted around the fretboard in the standard tuning e-a-d-g-b-e  which requires four chord-shapes for the major chords. there are separate chord-forms for chords having their root note on the third  fourth  fifth  and sixth strings.in contrast  regular tunings
have equal intervals between the strings  and so they have symmetrical scales all along the fretboard. this makes it simpler to translate chords. for the regular tunings  chords may be moved diagonally around the fretboard. the diagonal movement of chords is especially simple for the regular tunings that are repetitive  in which case chords can be moved vertically  chords can be moved three strings up (or down) in major-thirds tuning and chords can be moved two strings up (or down) in augmented-fourths tuning. regular tunings thus appeal to new guitarists and also to jazz-guitarists  whose improvisation is simplified by regular intervals. on the other hand  some chords are more difficult to play in a regular tuning than in standard tuning. it can be difficult to play conventional chords especially in augmented-fourths tuning and all-fifths tuning  in which the large spacings require hand stretching. some chords  which are conventional in folk music  are difficult to play even in all-fourths and major-thirds tunings  which do not require more hand-stretching than standard tuning. in major-thirds tuning  the interval between open strings is always a major third. consequently  four frets suffice to play the chromatic scale. chord inversion is especially simple in major-thirds tuning. chords are inverted simply by raising one or two notes by three strings. the raised notes are played with the same finger as the original notes. in contrast  in standard tuning  the shape of inversions depends on the involvement of the irregular major-third. all-fourths tuning replaces the major third between the third and second strings with a fourth  extending the conventional tuning of a bass guitar. with all-fourths tuning  playing the triads is more difficult  but improvisation is simplified  because chord-patterns remain constant when moved around the fretboard. jazz guitarist stanley jordan uses the all-fourths tuning eadgcf. invariant chord-shapes are an advantage of other regular tunings  such as major-thirds and all-fifths tunings. extending the tunings of violins and cellos  all-fifths tuning offers an expanded range cgdaeb  which however has been impossible to implement on a conventional guitar. all-fifths tuning is used for the lowest five strings of the new standard tuning of robert fripp and his former students in guitar craft courses  new standard tuning has a high g on its last string cgdae-g.another class of alternative tunings are called drop tunings  because the tuning drops down the lowest string. dropping down the lowest string a whole tone results in the  drop-d  (or  dropped d ) tuning. its open-string notes dadgbe (from low to high) allow for a deep bass d note  which can be used in keys such as d major  d minor and g major. it simplifies the playing of simple fifths (powerchords). many contemporary rock bands re-tune all strings down  making  for example  drop-c or drop-b tunings.   === scordatura === many scordatura (alternate tunings) modify the standard tuning of the lute  especially when playing renaissance
music repertoire originally written for that instrument. some scordatura drop the pitch of one or more strings  giving access to new lower notes. some scordatura make it easier to play in unusual keys.   == accessories == though a guitar may be played on its own  there are a variety of common accessories used for holding and playing the guitar.   === capotasto ===  a capo (short for capotasto) is used to change the pitch of open strings. capos are clipped onto the fretboard with the aid of spring tension  or in some models  elastic tension. to raise the guitar s pitch by one semitone  the player would clip the capo onto the fretboard just below the first fret. its use allows players to play in different keys without having to change the chord formations they use. for example  if a folk guitar player wanted to play a song in the key of b major  they could put a capo on the second fret of the instrument  and then play the song as if it were in the key of a major  but with the capo the instrument would make the sounds of b major. this is because with the capo barring the entire second fret  open chords would all sound two semitones (aka one tone) higher in pitch. for example  if a guitarist played an open a major chord (a very common open chord)  it would sound like a b major chord. all of the other open chords would be similarly modified in pitch. because of the ease with which they allow guitar players to change keys  they are sometimes referred to with pejorative names  such as  cheaters  or the  hillbilly crutch . despite this negative viewpoint  another benefit of the capo is that it enables guitarists to obtain the ringing  resonant sound of the common keys (c  g  a  etc.) in  harder  and less-commonly used keys. classical performers are known to use them to enable modern instruments to match the pitch of historical instruments such as the renaissance music lute.   === slides ===  a slide  (neck of a bottle  knife blade or round metal or glass bar or cylinder) is used in blues and rock to create a glissando or  hawaiian  effect. the slide is used to fret notes on the neck  instead of using the fretting hand s fingers. the characteristic use of the slide is to move up to the intended pitch by  as the name implies  sliding up the neck to the desired note. the necks of bottles were often used in blues and country music as improvised slides. modern slides are constructed of glass  plastic  ceramic  chrome  brass or steel bars or cylinders  depending on the weight and tone desired (and the amount of money a guitarist can spend). an instrument that is played
exclusively in this manner (using a metal bar) is called a steel guitar or pedal steel. slide playing to this day is very popular in blues music and country music. some slide players use a so-called dobro guitar. some performers who have become famous for playing slide are robert johnson  elmore james  ry cooder  george harrison  bonnie raitt  derek trucks  warren haynes  duane allman  muddy waters  rory gallagher  and george thorogood.   === plectrum ===  a  guitar pick  or  plectrum  is a small piece of hard material generally held between the thumb and first finger of the picking hand and is used to  pick  the strings. though most classical players pick with a combination of fingernails and fleshy fingertips  the pick is most often used for electric and steel-string acoustic guitars. though today they are mainly plastic  variations do exist  such as bone  wood  steel or tortoise shell. tortoise shell was the most commonly used material in the early days of pick-making  but as tortoises and turtles became endangered  the practice of using their shells for picks or anything else was banned. tortoise-shell picks made before the ban are often coveted for a supposedly superior tone and ease of use  and their scarcity has made them valuable. picks come in many shapes and sizes. picks vary from the small jazz pick to the large bass pick. the thickness of the pick often determines its use. a thinner pick (between 0.2 and 0.5 mm) is usually used for strumming or rhythm playing  whereas thicker picks (between 0.7 and 1.5+ mm) are usually used for single-note lines or lead playing. the distinctive guitar sound of billy gibbons is attributed to using a quarter or peso as a pick. similarly  brian may is known to use a sixpence coin as a pick  while noted 1970s and early 1980s session musician david persons is known for using old credit cards  cut to the correct size  as plectrums. thumb picks and finger picks that attach to the finger tips are sometimes employed in finger-picking styles on steel strings. these allow the fingers and thumb to operate independently  whereas a flat pick requires the thumb and one or two fingers to manipulate.   === straps === a guitar strap is a strip of material with an attachment mechanism on each end  made to hold a guitar via the shoulders at an adjustable length. guitars have varying accommodations for attaching a strap. the most common are strap buttons  also called strap pins  which are flanged steel posts anchored to the guitar with screws. two strap buttons come pre-attached to virtually all electric guitars  and many steel-string acoustic guitars. strap buttons are sometimes replaced with  strap locks  which connect the guitar to the strap more securely. the lower strap button is usually located at the bottom (bridge end) of the body.
the upper strap button is usually located near or at the top (neck end) of the body  on the upper body curve  at the tip of the upper  horn  (on a double cutaway)  or at the neck joint (heel). some electrics  especially those with odd-shaped bodies  have one or both strap buttons on the back of the body. some steinberger electric guitars  owing to their minimalist and lightweight design  have both strap buttons at the bottom of the body. rarely  on some acoustics  the upper strap button is located on the headstock. some acoustic and classical guitars only have a single strap button at the bottom of the body—the other end must be tied onto the headstock  above the nut and below the machine heads.   === amplifiers  effects and speakers ===  electric guitars and bass guitars have to be used with a guitar amplifier and loudspeaker or a bass amplifier and speaker  respectively  in order to make enough sound to be heard by the performer and audience. electric guitars and bass guitars almost always use magnetic pickups  which generate an electric signal when the musician plucks  strums or otherwise plays the instrument. the amplifier and speaker strengthen this signal using a power amplifier and a loudspeaker. acoustic guitars that are equipped with a piezoelectric pickup or microphone can also be plugged into an instrument amplifier  acoustic guitar amp or pa system to make them louder. with electric guitar and bass  the amplifier and speaker are not just used to make the instrument louder  by adjusting the equalizer controls  the preamplifier  and any onboard effects units (reverb  distortion/overdrive  etc.) the player can also modify the tone (aka timbre or  colour ) and sound of the instrument. acoustic guitar players can also use the amp to change the sound of their instrument  but in general  acoustic guitar amps are used to make the natural acoustic sound of the instrument louder without changing its sound that much.   == see also == outline of guitars list of guitar manufacturers   == notes and references ==   === notes ===   === citations ===   === sources ===   ==== books  journals ====   ==== online ==== sethares  william a. (2001).  alternate tuning guide  (pdf). university of wisconsin. retrieved 20 may 2016. turnbull  harvey et al.  guitar . oxford music online. oxford university press. retrieved 20 may 2016.cs1 maint  uses authors parameter (link)   == external links ==  instruments in depth  the guitar an online feature from bloomingdale school of music (october 2007) international guitar research archive the guitar  heilbrunn timeline of art history  the metropolitan museum of art featuring many historic guitars from the museum s collection online guitar acoustic guitar realistic simulator
the drum is a member of the percussion group of musical instruments. in the hornbostel-sachs classification system  it is a membranophone. drums consist of at least one membrane  called a drumhead or drum skin  that is stretched over a shell and struck  either directly with the player s hands  or with a percussion mallet  to produce sound. there is usually a resonance head on the underside of the drum  typically tuned to a slightly lower pitch than the top drumhead. other techniques have been used to cause drums to make sound  such as the thumb roll. drums are the world s oldest and most ubiquitous musical instruments  and the basic design has remained virtually unchanged for thousands of years.drums may be played individually  with the player using a single drum  and some drums such as the djembe are almost always played in this way. others are normally played in a set of two or more  all played by the one player  such as bongo drums and timpani. a number of different drums together with cymbals form the basic modern drum kit.   == uses == drums are usually played by striking with the hand  or with one or two sticks with or without padding. a wide variety of sticks are used  including wooden sticks and sticks with soft beaters of felt on the end. in jazz  some drummers use brushes for a smoother  quieter sound. in many traditional cultures  drums have a symbolic function and are used in religious ceremonies. drums are often used in music therapy  especially hand drums  because of their tactile nature and easy use by a wide variety of people.in popular music and jazz   drums  usually refers to a drum kit or a set of drums (with some cymbals  or in the case of harder rock music genres  many cymbals)  and  drummer  to the person who plays them. drums acquired even divine status in places such as burundi  where the karyenda was a symbol of the power of the king.   == construction ==  the shell almost always has a circular opening over which the drumhead is stretched  but the shape of the remainder of the shell varies widely. in the western musical tradition  the most usual shape is a cylinder  although timpani  for example  use bowl-shaped shells. other shapes include a frame design (tar  bodhrán)  truncated cones (bongo drums  ashiko)  goblet shaped (djembe)  and joined truncated cones (talking drum). drums with cylindrical shells can be open at one end (as is the case with timbales)  or can have two drum heads  one head on each end. single-headed drums typically consist of a skin stretched over an enclosed space  or over one of the ends of a hollow vessel. drums with two heads covering both ends of a cylindrical shell often have a
small hole somewhat halfway between the two heads  the shell forms a resonating chamber for the resulting sound. exceptions include the african slit drum  also known as a log drum as it is made from a hollowed-out tree trunk  and the caribbean steel drum  made from a metal barrel. drums with two heads can also have a set of wires  called snares  held across the bottom head  top head  or both heads  hence the name snare drum. on some drums with two heads  a hole or bass reflex port may be cut or installed onto one head  as with some 2010s era bass drums in rock music. on modern band and orchestral drums  the drumhead is placed over the opening of the drum  which in turn is held onto the shell by a  counterhoop  (or  rim )  which is then held by means of a number of tuning screws called  tension rods  that screw into lugs placed evenly around the circumference. the head s tension can be adjusted by loosening or tightening the rods. many such drums have six to ten tension rods. the sound of a drum depends on many variables—including shape  shell size and thickness  shell materials  counterhoop material  drumhead material  drumhead tension  drum position  location  and striking velocity and angle.prior to the invention of tension rods  drum skins were attached and tuned by rope systems—as on the djembe—or pegs and ropes such as on ewe drums. these methods are rarely used today  though sometimes appear on regimental marching band snare drums. the head of a talking drum  for example  can be temporarily tightened by squeezing the ropes that connect the top and bottom heads. similarly  the tabla is tuned by hammering a disc held in place around the drum by ropes stretching from the top to bottom head. orchestral timpani can be quickly tuned to precise pitches by using a foot pedal.   == sound ==  several factors determine the sound a drum produces  including the type  shape and construction of the drum shell  the type of drum heads it has  and the tension of these drumheads. different drum sounds have different uses in music. for example  the modern tom-tom drum. a jazz drummer may want drums that are high pitched  resonant and quiet whereas a rock drummer may prefer drums that are loud  dry and low-pitched. the drum head has the most effect on how a drum sounds. each type of drum head serves its own musical purpose and has its own unique sound. double-ply drumheads dampen high frequency harmonics because they are heavier and they are suited to heavy playing. drum heads with a white  textured coating on them muffle the overtones of the drum head slightly  producing a less diverse pitch. drum heads with central silver or black dots tend to muffle the
overtones even more  while drum heads with perimeter sound rings mostly eliminate overtones. some jazz drummers avoid using thick drum heads  preferring single ply drum heads or drum heads with no muffling. rock drummers often prefer the thicker or coated drum heads. the second biggest factor that affects drum sound is head tension against the shell. when the hoop is placed around the drum head and shell and tightened down with tension rods  the tension of the head can be adjusted. when the tension is increased  the amplitude of the sound is reduced and the frequency is increased  making the pitch higher and the volume lower. the type of shell also affects the sound of a drum. because the vibrations resonate in the shell of the drum  the shell can be used to increase the volume and to manipulate the type of sound produced. the larger the diameter of the shell  the lower the pitch. the larger the depth of the drum  the louder the volume. shell thickness also determines the volume of drums. thicker shells produce louder drums. mahogany raises the frequency of low pitches and keeps higher frequencies at about the same speed. when choosing a set of shells  a jazz drummer may want smaller maple shells  while a rock drummer may want larger birch shells.   == history ==  drums made with alligator skins have been found in neolithic cultures located in china  dating to a period of 5500–2350 bc. in literary records  drums manifested shamanistic characteristics and were often used in ritual ceremonies.the bronze dong son drum was fabricated by the bronze age dong son culture of northern vietnam. they include the ornate ngoc lu drum.   === animal drumming === macaque monkeys drum objects in a rhythmic way to show social dominance and this has been shown to be processed in a similar way in their brains to vocalizations  suggesting an evolutionary origin to drumming as part of social communication. other primates make drumming sounds by chest beating or hand clapping  and rodents such as kangaroo rats also make similar sounds using their paws on the ground.   === talking drums ===  drums are used not only for their musical qualities  but also as a means of communication over great distances. the talking drums of africa are used to imitate the tone patterns of spoken language. throughout sri lankan history drums have been used for communication between the state and the community  and sri lankan drums have a history stretching back over 2500 years.   === drums in art === drumming may be a purposeful expression of emotion for entertainment  spiritualism and communication. many cultures practice drumming as a spiritual or religious passage and interpret drummed rhythm similarly to spoken language or prayer. drumming has developed over millennia to be a powerful art form. drumming is commonly viewed as the root of music and is sometimes performed as a kinesthetic dance. as a discipline
 drumming concentrates on training the body to punctuate  convey and interpret musical rhythmic intention to an audience and to the performer.   === military uses ===  chinese troops used tàigǔ drums to motivate troops  to help set a marching pace  and to call out orders or announcements. for example  during a war between qi and lu in 684 bc  the effect of drum on soldiers  morale is employed to change the result of a major battle. fife-and-drum corps of swiss mercenary foot soldiers also used drums. they used an early version of the snare drum carried over the player s right shoulder  suspended by a strap (typically played with one hand using traditional grip). it is to this instrument that the english word  drum  was first used. similarly  during the english civil war rope-tension drums would be carried by junior officers as a means to relay commands from senior officers over the noise of battle. these were also hung over the shoulder of the drummer and typically played with two drum sticks. different regiments and companies would have distinctive and unique drum beats only they recognized. in the mid-19th century  the scottish military started incorporating pipe bands into their highland regiments.during pre-columbian warfare  aztec nations were known to have used drums to send signals to the battling warriors. the nahuatl word for drum is roughly translated as huehuetl.the rig veda  one of the oldest religious scriptures in the world  contains several references to the use of the dundhubi (war drum). arya tribes charged into battle to the beating of the war drum and chanting of a hymn that appears in book vi of the rig veda and also the atharva veda where it is referred to as the  hymn to the battle drum .   == types ==   == see also ==   == references ==   == external links ==  the dictionary definition of drum at wiktionary  drum  . encyclopædia britannica. 8 (11th ed.). 1911. folk workshop for drums and another folk-instruments drums (polish folk musical instruments) drum resources at curlie
a trumpet is a brass instrument commonly used in classical and jazz ensembles. the trumpet group contains the instruments (such as the piccolo trumpet) with the highest register in the brass family. trumpet-like instruments have historically been used as signaling devices in battle or hunting  with examples dating back to at least 1500 bc  they began to be used as musical instruments only in the late 14th or early 15th century. trumpets are used in art music styles  for instance in orchestras  concert bands  and jazz ensembles  as well as in popular music. they are played by blowing air through nearly-closed lips (called the player s embouchure)  producing a  buzzing  sound that starts a standing wave vibration in the air column inside the instrument. since the late 15th century they have primarily been constructed of brass tubing  usually bent twice into a rounded rectangular shape.there are many distinct types of trumpet  with the most common being pitched in b♭ (a transposing instrument)  having a tubing length of about 1.48 m (4 ft 10 in). early trumpets did not provide means to change the length of tubing  whereas modern instruments generally have three (or sometimes four) valves in order to change their pitch. there are eight combinations of three valves  making seven different tubing lengths  with the third valve sometimes used as an alternate fingering equivalent to the 1–2 combination. most trumpets have valves of the piston type  while some have the rotary type. the use of rotary-valved trumpets is more common in orchestral settings  although this practice varies by country. each valve  when engaged  increases the length of tubing  lowering the pitch of the instrument. a musician who plays the trumpet is called a trumpet player or trumpeter.   == etymology == the english word  trumpet  was first used in the late 14th century. the word came from old french  trompette  which is a diminutive of trompe. the word  trump  meaning  trumpet  was first used in english in 1300. the word comes from old french trompe  long  tube-like musical wind instrument  (12c.)  cognate with provençal tromba  italian tromba  all probably from a germanic source (compare old high german trumpa  old norse trumba  trumpet )  of imitative origin.    == history ==  the earliest trumpets date back to 1500 bc and earlier. the bronze and silver trumpets from tutankhamun s grave in egypt  bronze lurs from scandinavia  and metal trumpets from china date back to this period. trumpets from the oxus civilization (3rd millennium bc) of central asia have decorated swellings in the middle  yet are made out of one sheet of metal  which is considered a technical wonder.the shofar  made from a ram horn and the hatzotzeroth  made of metal  are both mentioned in the bible. they were played in solomon s temple around
3000 years ago. they were said to be used to blow down the walls of jericho. they are still used on certain religious days.  the salpinx was a straight trumpet 62 inches (1 600 mm) long  made of bone or bronze. salpinx contests were a part of the original olympic games.  the moche people of ancient peru depicted trumpets in their art going back to ad 300. the earliest trumpets were signaling instruments used for military or religious purposes  rather than music in the modern sense  and the modern bugle continues this signaling tradition.  improvements to instrument design and metal making in the late middle ages and renaissance led to an increased usefulness of the trumpet as a musical instrument. the natural trumpets of this era consisted of a single coiled tube without valves and therefore could only produce the notes of a single overtone series. changing keys required the player to change crooks of the instrument.  the development of the upper   clarino  register by specialist trumpeters—notably cesare bendinelli—would lend itself well to the baroque era  also known as the  golden age of the natural trumpet.  during this period  a vast body of music was written for virtuoso trumpeters. the art was revived in the mid-20th century and natural trumpet playing is again a thriving art around the world. many modern players in germany and the uk who perform baroque music use a version of the natural trumpet fitted with three or four vent holes to aid in correcting out-of-tune notes in the harmonic series.the melody-dominated homophony of the classical and romantic periods relegated the trumpet to a secondary role by most major composers owing to the limitations of the natural trumpet. berlioz wrote in 1844   notwithstanding the real loftiness and distinguished nature of its quality of tone  there are few instruments that have been more degraded (than the trumpet). down to beethoven and weber  every composer – not excepting mozart – persisted in confining it to the unworthy function of filling up  or in causing it to sound two or three commonplace rhythmical formulae.   == construction ==  the trumpet is constructed of brass tubing bent twice into a rounded oblong shape. as with all brass instruments  sound is produced by blowing air through closed lips  producing a  buzzing  sound into the mouthpiece and starting a standing wave vibration in the air column inside the trumpet. the player can select the pitch from a range of overtones or harmonics by changing the lip aperture and tension (known as the embouchure). the mouthpiece has a circular rim  which provides a comfortable environment for the lips  vibration. directly behind the rim is the cup  which channels the air into a much smaller opening (the back bore or shank) that tapers out slightly to match the diameter of the trumpet s lead pipe. the dimensions of these parts of the mouthpiece affect the timbre or quality
of sound  the ease of playability  and player comfort. generally  the wider and deeper the cup  the darker the sound and timbre.  modern trumpets have three (or  infrequently  four) piston valves  each of which increases the length of tubing when engaged  thereby lowering the pitch. the first valve lowers the instrument s pitch by a whole step (two semitones)  the second valve by a half step (one semitone)  and the third valve by one and a half steps (three semitones). when a fourth valve is present  as with some piccolo trumpets  it usually lowers the pitch a perfect fourth (five semitones). used singly and in combination these valves make the instrument fully chromatic  i.e.  able to play all twelve pitches of classical music. for more information about the different types of valves  see brass instrument valves. the pitch of the trumpet can be raised or lowered by the use of the tuning slide. pulling the slide out lowers the pitch  pushing the slide in raises it. to overcome the problems of intonation and reduce the use of the slide  renold schilke designed the tuning-bell trumpet. removing the usual brace between the bell and a valve body allows the use of a sliding bell  the player may then tune the horn with the bell while leaving the slide pushed in  or nearly so  thereby improving intonation and overall response.a trumpet becomes a closed tube when the player presses it to the lips  therefore  the instrument only naturally produces every other overtone of the harmonic series. the shape of the bell makes the missing overtones audible. most notes in the series are slightly out of tune and modern trumpets have slide mechanisms for the first and third valves with which the player can compensate by throwing (extending) or retracting one or both slides  using the left thumb and ring finger for the first and third valve slides respectively.   == types == the most common type is the b♭ trumpet  but a  c  d  e♭  e  low f  and g trumpets are also available. the c trumpet is most common in american orchestral playing  where it is used alongside the b♭ trumpet. orchestral trumpet players are adept at transposing music at sight  frequently playing music written for the a  b♭  d  e♭  e  or f trumpet on the c trumpet or b♭ trumpet.  the smallest trumpets are referred to as piccolo trumpets. the most common of these are built to play in both b♭ and a  with separate leadpipes for each key. the tubing in the b♭ piccolo trumpet is one-half the length of that in a standard b♭ trumpet. piccolo trumpets in g  f and c are also manufactured  but are less common. many players use a smaller mouthpiece on the piccolo trumpet  which requires a different sound production
technique from the b♭ trumpet and can limit endurance. almost all piccolo trumpets have four valves instead of the usual three — the fourth valve lowers the pitch  usually by a fourth  to assist in the playing of lower notes and to create alternate fingerings that facilitate certain trills. maurice andré  håkan hardenberger  david mason  and wynton marsalis are some well-known trumpet players known for their additional virtuosity on the piccolo trumpet.  trumpets pitched in the key of low g are also called sopranos  or soprano bugles  after their adaptation from military bugles. traditionally used in drum and bugle corps  sopranos have featured both rotary valves and piston valves. the bass trumpet is usually played by a trombone player  being at the same pitch. bass trumpet is played with a shallower trombone mouthpiece  and music for it is written in treble clef. the most common keys for bass trumpets are c and b♭. both c and b♭ bass trumpets are transposing instruments sounding an octave (c) or a major ninth (b♭) lower than written. the historical slide trumpet was probably first developed in the late 14th century for use in alta cappella wind bands. deriving from early straight trumpets  the renaissance slide trumpet was essentially a natural trumpet with a sliding leadpipe. this single slide was rather awkward  as the entire corpus of the instrument moved  and the range of the slide was probably no more than a major third. originals were probably pitched in d  to fit with shawms in d and g  probably at a typical pitch standard near a=466 hz. as no known instruments from this period survive  the details—and even the existence—of a renaissance slide trumpet is a matter of conjecture and debate among scholars.some slide trumpet designs saw use in england in the 18th century.the pocket trumpet is a compact b♭ trumpet. the bell is usually smaller than a standard trumpet and the tubing is more tightly wound to reduce the instrument size without reducing the total tube length. its design is not standardized  and the quality of various models varies greatly. it can have a tone quality and projection unique in the trumpet world  a warm sound and a voice-like articulation. since many pocket trumpet models suffer from poor design as well as cheap and imprecise manufacturing  the intonation  tone color and dynamic range of such instruments are severely hindered. professional-standard instruments are  however  available. while they are not a substitute for the full-sized instrument  they can be useful in certain contexts. the jazz musician don cherry was renowned for his playing of the pocket instrument. the herald trumpet has an elongated bell extending far in front of the player  allowing a standard length of tubing from which a flag may be hung  the instrument is mostly used for ceremonial events such as parades and fanfares. monette designed the flumpet in 1989 for jazz musician art farmer. it is a
hybrid instrument with elements of trumpet and flugelhorn  sharing the three piston valve design and with a pitch of b♭.there are also rotary-valve  or german  trumpets (which are commonly used in professional german and austrian orchestras) as well as alto and baroque trumpets. the trumpet is often confused with its close relative the cornet  which has a more conical tubing shape compared to the trumpet s more cylindrical tube. this  along with additional bends in the cornet s tubing  gives the cornet a slightly mellower tone  but the instruments are otherwise nearly identical. they have the same length of tubing and  therefore  the same pitch  so music written for cornet and trumpet is interchangeable. another relative  the flugelhorn  has tubing that is even more conical than that of the cornet  and an even richer tone. it is sometimes augmented with a fourth valve to improve the intonation of some lower notes.   == playing ==   === fingering === on any modern trumpet  cornet  or flugelhorn  pressing the valves indicated by the numbers below produces the written notes shown.  open  means all valves up   1  means first valve   1–2  means first and second valve simultaneously  and so on. the sounding pitch depends on the transposition of the instrument. engaging the fourth valve  if present  usually drops any of these pitches by a perfect fourth as well. within each overtone series  the different pitches are attained by changing the embouchure. standard fingerings above high c are the same as for the notes an octave below (c♯ is 1–2  d is 1  etc.)  each overtone series on the trumpet begins with the first overtone—the fundamental of each overtone series cannot be produced except as a pedal tone. notes in parentheses are the sixth overtone  representing a pitch with a frequency of seven times that of the fundamental  while this pitch is close to the note shown  it is slightly flat relative to equal temperament  and use of those fingerings is generally avoided. the fingering schema arises from the length of each valve s tubing (a longer tube produces a lower pitch). valve  1  increases the tubing length enough to lower the pitch by one whole step  valve  2  by one half step  and valve  3  by one and a half steps. this scheme and the nature of the overtone series create the possibility of alternate fingerings for certain notes. for example  third-space  c  can be produced with no valves engaged (standard fingering) or with valves 2–3. also  any note produced with 1–2 as its standard fingering can also be produced with valve 3 – each drops the pitch by ​1 1⁄2 steps. alternate fingerings may be used to improve facility in certain passages  or to aid in intonation. extending the third valve slide when
using the fingerings 1–3 or 1-2-3 further lowers the pitch slightly to improve intonation.   === mute ===  various types of mutes can be used to alter the sound of the instrument when placed in or over the bell. while most types of mutes do decrease the volume the instrument produces  as the name implies  the sound modification is typically the primary reason for their use. types of mutes most commonly used to alter the sound of the instrument are  straight mutes  harmon mutes (aka  wah-wah  mutes)  plunger mutes  bucket mutes  and cup mutes. a description of their construction and sound quality are below  straight mute  constructed of either aluminum  which produces a bright piercing sound  or stone lined with cardboard  which produces a stuffy sound. harmon mute  constructed of aluminum and consists of two parts called the  stem  and the  body . the stem can be extended or removed to produce different timbres of sound. this mute is also called the  wah-wah  mute due to its distinctive sound created by the player placing their hand over the stem opening and waving it back and forth. plunger mute  most often made of a rubber bathroom plunger without the stick. this is used to manipulate sound by the player holding it over the bell with their left hand. bucket mute  constructed from cardboard and cloth  this mute is clipped to the end of the bell and used to muffle the sound almost completely. cup mute  also constructed of cardboard  this mute is shaped exactly like a straight mute but includes a cup at the end. in many models the cup is adjustable much like the stem on the harmon mute and produces a softer more muffled sound than a traditional straight mute.   == range ==  the standard trumpet range extends from the written f♯ immediately below middle c up to about three octaves higher (f♯3 – f♯6). traditional trumpet repertoire rarely calls for notes beyond this range  and the fingering tables of most method books peak at the high c  two octaves above middle c. several trumpeters have achieved fame for their proficiency in the extreme high register  among them maynard ferguson  cat anderson  dizzy gillespie  doc severinsen  and more recently wayne bergeron  thomas gansch  james morrison  jon faddis and arturo sandoval. it is also possible to produce pedal tones below the low f♯  which is a device commonly employed in contemporary repertoire for the instrument.   == extended technique == contemporary music for the trumpet makes wide uses of extended trumpet techniques. flutter tonguing  the trumpeter rolls the tip of the tongue to produce a  growling like  tone. it is achieved as if one were rolling an r in the spanish language. this technique is widely employed by composers like berio and stockhausen. growling  simultaneously playing
tone while using the back of the tongue to vibrate the uvula creating a distinct sound.  most trumpet players will use a plunger with this technique to achieve a particular sound heard in a lot of chicago jazz of the 1950s. double tonguing  the player articulates using the syllables ta-ka ta-ka ta-ka triple tonguing  the same as double tonguing  but with the syllables ta-ta-ka ta-ta-ka ta-ta-ka or ta-ka-ta ta-ka-ta. doodle tongue  the trumpeter tongues as if saying the word doodle. this is a very faint tonguing similar in sound to a valve tremolo. glissando  trumpeters can slide between notes by depressing the valves halfway and changing the lip tension. modern repertoire makes extensive use of this technique. vibrato  it is often regulated in contemporary repertoire through specific notation. composers can call for everything from fast  slow or no vibrato to actual rhythmic patterns played with vibrato. pedal tone  composers have written for two-and-a-half octaves below the low f♯  which is at the bottom of the standard range. extreme low pedals are produced by slipping the lower lip out of the mouthpiece. claude gordon assigned pedals as part of his trumpet practice routines  that were a systematic expansion on his lessons with herbert l. clarke. the technique was pioneered by bohumir kryl.microtones  composers such as scelsi and stockhausen have made wide use of the trumpet s ability to play microtonally. some instruments feature a fourth valve that provides a quarter-tone step between each note. the jazz musician ibrahim maalouf uses such a trumpet  invented by his father to make it possible to play arab maqams. valve tremolo  many notes on the trumpet can be played in several different valve combinations. by alternating between valve combinations on the same note  a tremolo effect can be created. berio makes extended use of this technique in his sequenza x. noises  by hissing  clicking  or breathing through the instrument  the trumpet can be made to resonate in ways that do not sound at all like a trumpet. noises may require amplification. preparation  composers have called for trumpeters to play under water  or with certain slides removed. it is increasingly common for composers to specify all sorts of preparations for trumpet. extreme preparations involve alternate constructions  such as double bells and extra valves. split tone  trumpeters can produce more than one tone simultaneously by vibrating the two lips at different speeds. the interval produced is usually an octave or a fifth. lip-trill or shake  also known as  lip-slurs . by rapidly varying air speed  but not changing the depressed valves  the pitch varies quickly between adjacent harmonic partials. shakes and lip-trills can vary in speed and the distance between the partials can be as large or small as the musicians  desires. traditionally  however  lip-trills and shakes are usually the next partial up from the written note. multi-phonics  playing a note and  humming  a different note
simultaneously. for example  sustaining a middle c and humming a major 3rd  e  at the same time. circular breathing  a technique wind players use to produce uninterrupted tone  without pauses for breaths. the player puffs up the cheeks  storing air  then breathes in rapidly through the nose while using the cheeks to continue pushing air outwards.   === instruction and method books === one trumpet method is jean-baptiste arban s complete conservatory method for trumpet (cornet). other well-known method books include technical studies by herbert l. clarke  grand method by louis saint-jacome  daily drills and technical studies by max schlossberg  and methods by ernest s. williams  claude gordon  charles colin  james stamp  and louis davidson. a common method book for beginners is the walter beeler s method for the cornet  and there have been several instruction books written by virtuoso allen vizzutti. merri franquin wrote a complete method for modern trumpet  which fell into obscurity for much of the twentieth century until public endorsements by maurice andré revived interest in this work.   == players ==  in early jazz  louis armstrong was well known for his virtuosity and his improvisations on the hot five and hot seven recordings  and his switch from cornet to trumpet is often cited as heralding the trumpet s dominance over the cornet in jazz.  dizzy gillespie was a gifted improviser with an extremely high (but musical) range  building on the style of roy eldridge but adding new layers of harmonic complexity. gillespie had an enormous impact on virtually every subsequent trumpeter  both by the example of his playing and as a mentor to younger musicians. miles davis is widely considered one of the most influential musicians of the 20th century—his style was distinctive and widely imitated. davis  phrasing and sense of space in his solos have been models for generations of jazz musicians. cat anderson was a trumpet player who was known for the ability to play extremely high with an even more extreme volume  who played with duke ellington s big band. maynard ferguson came to prominence playing in stan kenton s orchestra  before forming his own band in 1957. he was noted for being able to play accurately in a remarkably high register.   == musical pieces ==   === solos === anton weidinger developed in the 1790s the first successful keyed trumpet  capable of playing all the chromatic notes in its range. joseph haydn s trumpet concerto was written for him in 1796 and startled contemporary audiences by its novelty  a fact shown off by some stepwise melodies played low in the instrument s range.   == in art ==                == see also == compositions for trumpet muted trumpet wind controller   == references ==   === notes ===   === bibliography === barclay
 robert. the art of the trumpet-maker  the materials  tools and techniques of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in nuremberg   oxford university press  1992  isbn 0-19-816223-5 bate  philip. the trumpet and trombone  an outline of their history  development  and construction  ernest benn  1978  isbn 0-393-02129-7 brownlow  james arthur. the last trumpet  a history of the english slide trumpet  pendragon press  1996  isbn 0-945193-81-5 campos  frank gabriel. trumpet technique  oxford university press  2005  isbn 0-19-516692-2 cassone  gabriele. the trumpet book  pages 352+cd  illustrated  zecchini editore  2009  isbn 88-87203-80-6 sherman  roger. trumpeter s handbook  a comprehensive guide to playing and teaching the trumpet  accura music  1979  isbn 0-918194-02-4 skardinski  stan. you can t be timid with a trumpet  notes from the orchestra  lothrop  lee & shepard books  1980  isbn 0-688-41963-1 smithers  don l.  the music and history of the baroque trumpet before 1721  syracuse university press  1973  isbn 0-8156-2157-4.   == external links ==  trumpet  . encyclopædia britannica. 27 (11th ed.). 1911. international trumpet guild  international trumpet players  association with online library of scholarly journal back issues  news  jobs and other trumpet resources. trumpet playing articles by jeff purtle  protege of claude gordon trumpet players  international network is the oldest and largest email list with members from all parts of world. jay lichtmann s trumpet studies scales and technical trumpet studies. 60+ trumpet and teaching videos flash media tv of 60 trumpet and teaching videos by clint pops mclaughlin.
the violin  sometimes known as a fiddle  is a wooden string instrument in the violin family. most violins have a hollow wooden body. it is the smallest and highest-pitched instrument in the family in regular use. smaller violin-type instruments exist  including the violino piccolo and the kit violin  but these are virtually unused. the violin typically has four strings  usually tuned in perfect fifths with notes g3  d4  a4  e5  and is most commonly played by drawing a bow across its strings  though it can also be played by plucking the strings with the fingers (pizzicato) and by striking the strings with the wooden side of the bow (col legno).  violins are important instruments in a wide variety of musical genres. they are most prominent in the western classical tradition  both in ensembles (from chamber music to orchestras) and as solo instruments and in many varieties of folk music  including country music  bluegrass music and in jazz. electric violins with solid bodies and piezoelectric pickups are used in some forms of rock music and jazz fusion  with the pickups plugged into instrument amplifiers and speakers to produce sound. further  the violin has come to be played in many non-western music cultures  including indian music and iranian music. the name fiddle is often used regardless of the type of music played on it. the violin was first known in 16th-century italy  with some further modifications occurring in the 18th and 19th centuries to give the instrument a more powerful sound and projection. in europe  it served as the basis for the development of other stringed instruments used in western classical music  such as the viola.violinists and collectors particularly prize the fine historical instruments made by the stradivari  guarneri  guadagnini and amati families from the 16th to the 18th century in brescia and cremona (italy) and by jacob stainer in austria. according to their reputation  the quality of their sound has defied attempts to explain or equal it  though this belief is disputed. great numbers of instruments have come from the hands of less famous makers  as well as still greater numbers of mass-produced commercial  trade violins  coming from cottage industries in places such as saxony  bohemia  and mirecourt. many of these trade instruments were formerly sold by sears  roebuck and co. and other mass merchandisers. the parts of a violin are usually made from different types of wood. violins can be strung with gut  perlon or other synthetic  or steel strings. a person who makes or repairs violins is called a luthier or violinmaker. one who makes or repairs bows is called an archetier or bowmaker.   == etymology == the word  violin  was first used in english in the 1570s. the word  violin  comes from  italian violino  [a] diminutive of viola . the term  viola  comes from the expression for 
tenor violin  in 1797  from italian viola  from old provençal viola  [which came from] medieval latin vitula  as a term which means  stringed instrument  perhaps [coming] from vitula  roman goddess of joy...  or from related latin verb vitulari   to exult  be joyful.  the related term  viola da gamba  means  bass viol  (1724) is from italian  literally  a viola for the leg  (i.e. to hold between the legs).   a violin is the  modern form of the smaller  medieval viola da braccio.  ( arm viola )the violin is often called a fiddle  either when used in a folk music context  or even in classical music scenes  as an informal nickname for the instrument. the word  fiddle  was first used in english in the late 14th century. the word  fiddle  comes from  fedele  fydyll  fidel  earlier fithele  from old english fiðele  fiddle  which is related to old norse fiðla  middle dutch vedele  dutch vedel  old high german fidula  german fiedel   a fiddle  all of uncertain origin.  as to the origin of the word  fiddle  the  ...usual suggestion  based on resemblance in sound and sense  is that it is from medieval latin vitula.    == history ==  the earliest stringed instruments were mostly plucked (for example  the greek lyre). two-stringed  bowed instruments  played upright and strung and bowed with horsehair  may have originated in the nomadic equestrian cultures of central asia  in forms closely resembling the modern-day mongolian morin huur and the kazakh kobyz. similar and variant types were probably disseminated along east-west trading routes from asia into the middle east  and the byzantine empire.the direct ancestor of all european bowed instruments is the arabic rebab (ربابة)  which developed into the byzantine lyra by the 9th century and later the european rebec. the first makers of violins probably borrowed from various developments of the byzantine lyra. these included the vielle (also known as the fidel or viuola) and the lira da braccio. the violin in its present form emerged in early 16th-century northern italy. the earliest pictures of violins  albeit with three strings  are seen in northern italy around 1530  at around the same time as the words  violino  and  vyollon  are seen in italian and french documents. one of the earliest explicit descriptions of the instrument  including its tuning  is from the epitome musical by jambe de fer  published in lyon in 1556. by this time  the violin had already begun to spread throughout europe. the violin proved very popular  both among street musicians and the nobility  the french king charles ix ordered andrea amati to construct 24 violins for him in 1560. one of these  noble  instruments
 the charles ix  is the oldest surviving violin. the finest renaissance carved and decorated violin in the world is the gasparo da salò (c.1574) owned by ferdinand ii  archduke of austria and later  from 1841  by the norwegian virtuoso ole bull  who used it for forty years and thousands of concerts  for its very powerful and beautiful tone  similar to that of a guarneri.  the messiah  or  le messie  (also known as the  salabue ) made by antonio stradivari in 1716 remains pristine. it is now located in the ashmolean museum of oxford.the most famous violin makers (luthiers) between the 16th century and the 18th century include   the school of brescia  beginning in the late 14th century with liras  violettas  violas and active in the field of the violin in the first half of the 16th century the dalla corna family  active 1510–1560 in brescia and venice the micheli family  active 1530–1615 in brescia the inverardi family active 1550–1580 in brescia the gasparo da salò family  active 1530–1615 in brescia and salò giovanni paolo maggini  student of gasparo da salò  active 1600–1630 in brescia the rogeri family  active 1661-1721 in brescia the school of cremona  beginning in the second half of the 16th century with violas and violone and in the field of violin in the second half of the 16th century the amati family  active 1550–1740 in cremona the guarneri family  active 1626–1744 in cremona and venice the stradivari family  active 1644–1737 in cremona the rugeri family  active 1650-1740 in cremona carlo bergonzi (luthier) (1683-1747) in cremona the school of venice  with the presence of several makers of bowed instruments from the early 16th century out of more than 140 makers of string instruments registered between 1490–1630.the linarolo family  active 1505–1640 in venice matteo goffriller  known for his celli  active 1685–1742 in venice pietro guarneri  son of giuseppe giovanni battista guarneri and from cremona  active 1717–1762 in venice domenico montagnana  active circa 1700–1750 in venice santo serafin  active before 1741 until 1776 in venicesignificant changes occurred in the construction of the violin in the 18th century  particularly in the length and angle of the neck  as well as a heavier bass bar. the majority of old instruments have undergone these modifications  and hence are in a significantly different state than when they left the hands of their makers  doubtless with differences in sound and response. but these instruments in their present condition set the standard for perfection in violin craftsmanship and sound  and violin makers all over the world try to come as close to this ideal as possible. to this day  instruments from the so-called golden age of violin making  especially those made by stradivari  guarneri del gesù and montagnana are the most sought-after instruments by both collectors and performers.  the current record amount
paid for a stradivari violin is £9.8 million (us$15.9 million)  when the instrument known as the lady blunt was sold by tarisio auctions in an online auction on june 20  2011.   == construction and mechanics ==  a violin generally consists of a spruce top (the soundboard  also known as the top plate  table  or belly)  maple ribs and back  two endblocks  a neck  a bridge  a soundpost  four strings  and various fittings  optionally including a chinrest  which may attach directly over  or to the left of  the tailpiece. a distinctive feature of a violin body is its hourglass-like shape and the arching of its top and back. the hourglass shape comprises two upper bouts  two lower bouts  and two concave c-bouts at the waist  providing clearance for the bow. the  voice  or sound of a violin depends on its shape  the wood it is made from  the graduation (the thickness profile) of both the top and back  the varnish that coats its outside surface and the skill of the luthier in doing all of these steps. the varnish and especially the wood continue to improve with age  making the fixed supply of old well-made violins built by famous luthiers much sought-after. the majority of glued joints in the instrument use animal hide glue rather than common white glue for a number of reasons. hide glue is capable of making a thinner joint than most other glues  it is reversible (brittle enough to crack with carefully applied force  and removable with very warm water) when disassembly is needed  and since fresh hide glue sticks to old hide glue  more original wood can be preserved when repairing a joint. (more modern glues must be cleaned off entirely for the new joint to be sound  which generally involves scraping off some wood along with the old glue.) weaker  diluted glue is usually used to fasten the top to the ribs  and the nut to the fingerboard  since common repairs involve removing these parts. the purfling running around the edge of the spruce top provides some protection against cracks originating at the edge. it also allows the top to flex more independently of the rib structure. painted-on faux purfling on the top is usually a sign of an inferior instrument. the back and ribs are typically made of maple  most often with a matching striped figure  referred to as flame  fiddleback  or tiger stripe. the neck is usually maple with a flamed figure compatible with that of the ribs and back. it carries the fingerboard  typically made of ebony  but often some other wood stained or painted black on cheaper instruments. ebony is the preferred material because of its hardness  beauty  and superior resistance to wear. fingerboards are dressed to a particular transverse curve  and have a small lengthwise  scoop
 or concavity  slightly more pronounced on the lower strings  especially when meant for gut or synthetic strings. some old violins (and some made to appear old) have a grafted scroll  evidenced by a glue joint between the pegbox and neck. many authentic old instruments have had their necks reset to a slightly increased angle  and lengthened by about a centimeter. the neck graft allows the original scroll to be kept with a baroque violin when bringing its neck into conformance with modern standards.  the bridge is a precisely cut piece of maple that forms the lower anchor point of the vibrating length of the strings and transmits the vibration of the strings to the body of the instrument. its top curve holds the strings at the proper height from the fingerboard in an arc  allowing each to be sounded separately by the bow. the sound post  or soul post  fits precisely inside the instrument between the back and top  at a carefully chosen spot near the treble foot of the bridge  which it helps support. it also influences the modes of vibration of the top and the back of the instrument. the tailpiece anchors the strings to the lower bout of the violin by means of the tailgut  which loops around an ebony button called the tailpin (sometimes confusingly called the endpin  like the cello s spike)  which fits into a tapered hole in the bottom block. very often the e string will have a fine tuning lever worked by a small screw turned by the fingers. fine tuners may also be applied to the other strings  especially on a student instrument  and are sometimes built into the tailpiece. the fine tuners enable the performer to make small changes in the pitch of a string. at the scroll end  the strings wind around the wooden tuning pegs in the pegbox. the tuning pegs are tapered and fit into holes in the peg box. the tuning pegs are held in place by the friction of wood on wood. strings may be made of metal or less commonly gut or gut wrapped in metal. strings usually have a colored silk wrapping at both ends  for identification of the string (e.g.  g string  d string  a string or e string) and to provide friction against the pegs. the tapered pegs allow friction to be increased or decreased by the player applying appropriate pressure along the axis of the peg while turning it.   === strings ===  strings were first made of sheep gut (commonly known as catgut  which despite the name  did not come from cats)  or simply gut  which was stretched  dried  and twisted. in the early years of the 20th century  strings were made of either gut or steel. modern strings may be gut  solid steel  stranded steel  or various synthetic materials such as perlon  wound with various metals
 and sometimes plated with silver. most e strings are unwound  either plain or plated steel. gut strings are not as common as they once were  but many performers use them to achieve a specific sound especially in historically informed performance of baroque music. strings have a limited lifetime. eventually  when oil  dirt  corrosion  and rosin accumulate  the mass of the string can become uneven along its length. apart from obvious things  such as the winding of a string coming undone from wear  players generally change a string when it no longer plays  true  (with good intonation on the harmonics)  losing the desired tone  brilliance and intonation. string longevity depends on string quality and playing intensity.   === pitch range ===  a violin is tuned in fifths  in the notes g3  d4  a4  e5. the lowest note of a violin  tuned normally  is g3  or g below middle c. (on rare occasions  the lowest string may be tuned down by as much as a fourth  to d3.) the highest note is less well defined  e7  the e two octaves above the open string (which is tuned to e5) may be considered a practical limit for orchestral violin parts  but it is often possible to play higher  depending on the length of the fingerboard and the skill of the violinist. yet higher notes (up to c8) can be sounded by stopping the string  reaching the limit of the fingerboard  or by using artificial harmonics.   === acoustics ===  the arched shape  the thickness of the wood  and its physical qualities govern the sound of a violin. patterns of the node made by sand or glitter sprinkled on the plates with the plate vibrated at certain frequencies  called chladni patterns  are occasionally used by luthiers to verify their work before assembling the instrument.   === sizes ===  apart from the standard  full (​4⁄4) size  violins are also made in so-called fractional sizes of ​7⁄8  ​3⁄4  ​1⁄2  ​1⁄4  ​1⁄8  ​1⁄10  ​1⁄16  ​1⁄32 and even ​1⁄64. these smaller instruments are commonly used by young players  whose fingers are not long enough to reach the correct positions on full-sized instruments. while related in some sense to the dimensions of the instruments  the fractional sizes are not intended to be literal descriptions of relative proportions. for example  a ​3⁄4-sized instrument is not three-quarters the length of a full size instrument. the body length (not including the neck) of a full-size  or ​4⁄4  violin is 356 mm (14.0 in)  smaller in some 17th-century models. a ​3⁄4 violin s body length is 335 mm (13.2 in)  and a ​1⁄2 size is 310 mm (12.2 in). with the violin s closest family member  the viola  size is specified as body length in inches or centimeters
rather than fractional sizes. a full-size viola averages 40 cm (16 in). however  each individual adult will determine which size of viola to use. occasionally  an adult with a small frame may use a so-called ​7⁄8 size violin instead of a full-size instrument.  sometimes called a lady s violin  these instruments are slightly shorter than a full size violin  but tend to be high-quality instruments capable of producing a sound that is comparable to that of fine full size violins. 5 string violin sizes may differ from the normal 4 string.   === mezzo violin === the instrument which corresponds to the violin in the violin octet is the mezzo violin  tuned the same as a violin but with a slightly longer body. the strings of the mezzo violin are the same length as those of the standard violin.   == tuning ==  violins are tuned by turning the pegs in the pegbox under the scroll  or by adjusting the fine tuner screws at the tailpiece. all violins have pegs  fine tuners (also called fine adjusters) are optional. most fine tuners consist of a metal screw that moves a lever attached to the string end. they permit very small pitch adjustments much more easily than the pegs. by turning one clockwise  the pitch becomes sharper (as the string is under more tension) and turning one counterclockwise  the pitch becomes flatter (as the string is under less tension). fine tuners on all four of the strings are very helpful when using those that have a steel core  and some players use them with synthetic strings as well. since modern e strings are steel  a fine tuner is nearly always fitted for that string. fine tuners are not used with gut strings  which are more elastic than steel or synthetic-core strings and do not respond adequately to the very small movements of fine tuners. to tune a violin  the a string is first tuned to a standard pitch (usually 440 hz). (when accompanying or playing with a fixed-pitch instrument such as a piano or accordion  the violin tunes to it.) the other strings are then tuned against each other in intervals of perfect fifths by bowing them in pairs. a minutely higher tuning is sometimes employed for solo playing to give the instrument a brighter sound  conversely  baroque music is sometimes played using lower tunings to make the violin s sound more gentle. after tuning  the instrument s bridge may be examined to ensure that it is standing straight and centered between the inner nicks of the f-holes  a crooked bridge may significantly affect the sound of an otherwise well-made violin. after extensive playing  the holes into which the tuning pegs are inserted can become worn  which can lead the peg to slip under tension. this can lead to the pitch of the string dropping  or if the peg becomes completely loose  to the string completely losing tension.
a violin in which the tuning pegs are slipping needs to be repaired by a luthier or violin repairperson. peg dope or peg compound  used regularly  can delay the onset of such wear  while allowing the pegs to turn smoothly. the tuning g–d–a–e is used for most violin music  both in classical music  jazz and folk music. other tunings are occasionally employed  the g string  for example  can be tuned up to a. the use of nonstandard tunings in classical music is known as scordatura  in some folk styles  it is called cross tuning. one famous example of scordatura in classical music is camille saint-saëns  danse macabre  where the solo violin s e string is tuned down to e♭ to impart an eerie dissonance to the composition. other examples are the third movement of contrasts  by béla bartók  where the e string is tuned down to e♭ and the g tuned to a g♯  and the mystery sonatas by biber  in which each movement has different scordatura tuning. in indian classical music and indian light music  the violin is likely to be tuned to d♯–a♯–d♯–a♯ in the south indian style. as there is no concept of absolute pitch in indian classical music  any convenient tuning maintaining these relative pitch intervals between the strings can be used. another prevalent tuning with these intervals is b♭–f–b♭–f  which corresponds to sa–pa–sa–pa in the indian carnatic classical music style. in the north indian hindustani style  the tuning is usually pa-sa-pa-sa instead of sa–pa–sa–pa. this could correspond to f–b♭–f–b♭  for instance. in iranian classical music and iranian light music  the violin ls different tunings in any dastgah  the violin is likely to be tuned (e–a–e–a) in dastgah-h esfahan or in  dastgāh-e šur is (e–a–d–e) and (e–a–e–e)  in dastgāh-e māhur is (e–a–d–a). in arabic classical music  the a and e strings are lowered by a whole step i.e. g–d–g–d. this is to ease playing arabic maqams  especially those containing quarter tones. while most violins have four strings  there are violins with additional strings. some have as many as seven strings. seven strings is generally thought to be the maximum number of strings that can be put on a bowed string instrument  because with more than seven strings  it would be impossible to play a particular inner string individually with the bow. instruments with seven strings are very rare. the extra strings on such violins typically are lower in pitch than the g-string  these strings are usually tuned to c  f  and b♭. if the instrument s playing length  or string length from nut to bridge  is equal to that of an ordinary full-scale violin  i.e.  a bit less than 13 inches (33 cm)  then it may be properly termed a violin. some such instruments are somewhat longer and should be regarded as violas. violins with five strings or more are
typically used in jazz or folk music. some custom-made instruments have extra strings which are not bowed  but which sound sympathetically  due to the vibrations of the bowed strings.   == bows ==  a violin is usually played using a bow consisting of a stick with a ribbon of horsehair strung between the tip and frog (or nut  or heel) at opposite ends. a typical violin bow may be 75 cm (30 in) overall  and weigh about 60 g (2.1 oz). viola bows may be about 5 mm (0.20 in) shorter and 10 g (0.35 oz) heavier. at the frog end  a screw adjuster tightens or loosens the hair. just forward of the frog  a leather thumb cushion  called the grip  and winding protect the stick and provide a strong grip for the player s hand. traditional windings are of wire (often silver or plated silver)  silk  or baleen ( whalebone  now substituted by alternating strips of tan and black plastic.) some fiberglass student bows employ a plastic sleeve as grip and winding. bow hair traditionally comes from the tail of a grey male horse (which has predominantly white hair). some cheaper bows use synthetic fiber. solid rosin is rubbed onto the hair  to render it slightly sticky  when the bow is drawn across a string  the friction between them makes the string vibrate. traditional materials for the more costly bow sticks include snakewood  and brazilwood (which is also known as pernambuco wood). some recent bow design innovations use carbon fiber (codabows) for the stick  at all levels of craftsmanship. inexpensive bows for students are made of less costly timbers  or from fiberglass (glasser).   == playing ==   === posture ===  the violin is played either seated or standing up. solo players (whether playing alone  with a piano or with an orchestra) play mostly standing up (unless prevented by a physical disability such as in the case of itzhak perlman)  while in the orchestra and in chamber music it is usually played seated. in the 2000s and 2010s  some orchestras performing baroque music (such as the freiburg baroque orchestra) have had all of their violins and violas  solo and ensemble  perform standing up. the standard way of holding the violin is with the left side of the jaw resting on the chinrest of the violin  and supported by the left shoulder  often assisted by a shoulder rest (or a sponge and an elastic band for younger players who struggle with shoulder rests). the jaw and the shoulder must hold the violin firmly enough to allow it to remain stable when the left hand goes from a high position (a high pitched note far up on the fingerboard) to a low one (nearer to the pegbox). in the indian posture  the stability of the violin is guaranteed by its scroll resting on the side of the foot. while teachers point out the
vital importance of good posture both for the sake of the quality of the playing and to reduce the chance of repetitive strain injury  advice as to what good posture is and how to achieve it differs in details. however all insist on the importance of a natural relaxed position without tension or rigidity. things which are almost universally recommended is keeping the left wrist straight (or very nearly so) to allow the fingers of the left hand to move freely and to reduce the chance of injury and keeping either shoulder in a natural relaxed position and avoiding raising either of them in an exaggerated manner. this  like any other unwarranted tension  would limit freedom of motion  and increase the risk of injury. hunching can hamper good playing  because it throws the body off balance and makes the shoulders rise. another sign that comes from unhealthy tension is pain in the left hand  which indicates too much pressure when holding the violin.   === left hand and pitch production ===  the left hand determines the sounding length of the string  and thus the pitch of the string  by  stopping  it (pressing it) against the fingerboard with the fingertips  producing different pitches. as the violin has no frets to stop the strings  as is usual with the guitar  the player must know exactly where to place the fingers on the strings to play with good intonation (tuning). beginning violinists play open strings and the lowest position  nearest to the nut. students often start with relatively easy keys  such as a major and g major. students are taught scales and simple melodies. through practice of scales and arpeggios and ear training  the violinist s left hand eventually  finds  the notes intuitively by muscle memory. beginners sometimes rely on tapes placed on the fingerboard for proper left hand finger placement  but usually abandon the tapes quickly as they advance. another commonly used marking technique uses dots of white-out on the fingerboard  which wear off in a few weeks of regular practice. this practice  unfortunately  is used sometimes in lieu of adequate ear-training  guiding the placement of fingers by eye and not by ear. especially in the early stages of learning to play  the so-called  ringing tones  are useful. there are nine such notes in first position  where a stopped note sounds a unison or octave with another (open) string  causing it to resonate sympathetically. students often use these ringing tones to check the intonation of the stopped note by seeing if it is harmonious with the open string. for example  when playing the stopped pitch  a  on the g string  the violinist could play the open d string at the same time  to check the intonation of the stopped  a . if the  a  is in tune  the  a  and the open d
string should produce a harmonious perfect fourth. violins are tuned in perfect fifths  like all the orchestral strings (violin  viola  cello) except the double bass  which is tuned in perfect fourths. each subsequent note is stopped at a pitch the player perceives as the most harmonious   when unaccompanied  [a violinist] does not play consistently in either the tempered or the natural [just] scale  but tends on the whole to conform with the pythagorean scale.  when violinists are playing in a string quartet or a string orchestra  the strings typically  sweeten  their tuning to suit the key they are playing in. when playing with an instrument tuned to equal temperament  such as a piano  skilled violinists adjust their tuning to match the equal temperament of the piano to avoid discordant notes. the fingers are conventionally numbered 1 (index) through 4 (little finger) in music notation  such as sheet music and etude books.  especially in instructional editions of violin music  numbers over the notes may indicate which finger to use  with 0 or o indicating an open string. the chart to the right shows the arrangement of notes reachable in first position. not shown on this chart is the way the spacing between note positions becomes closer as the fingers move up (in pitch) from the nut.  the bars at the sides of the chart represent the usual possibilities for beginners  tape placements  at 1st  high 2nd  3rd  and 4th fingers.    ==== positions ==== the placement of the left hand on the fingerboard is characterized by  positions .  first position  where most beginners start (although some methods start in third position)  is the most commonly used position in string music. music composed for beginning youth orchestras is often mostly in first position. the lowest note available in this position in standard tuning is an open g  the highest note in first position is played with the fourth finger on the e-string  sounding a b. moving the hand up the neck  so the first finger takes the place of the second finger  brings the player into second position. letting the first finger take the first-position place of the third finger brings the player to third position  and so on. a change of positions  with its associated movement of the hand  is referred to as a shift  and effective shifting maintaining accurate intonation and a smooth legato (connected) sound is a key element of technique at all levels. often a  guide finger  is used  the last finger to play a note in the old position continuously lightly touches the string during the course of the shift to end up on its correct place in the new position. in elementary shifting exercises the  guide finger  is often voiced while it glides up and down the string  so the player can establish by
ear whether they are landing in the correct place  however outside of these exercises it should rarely be audible (unless the performer is consciously applying a portamento effect for expressive reasons). in the course of a shift in low positions  the thumb of the left hand moves up or down the neck of the instrument so as to remain in the same position relative to the fingers (though the movement of the thumb may occur slightly before  or slightly after  the movement of the fingers). in such positions  the thumb is often thought of as an  anchor  whose location defines what position the player is in. in very high positions  the thumb is unable to move with the fingers as the body of the instrument gets in the way. instead  the thumb works around the neck of the instrument to sit at the point at which the neck meets the right bout of the body  and remains there while the fingers move between the high positions. a note played outside of the normal compass of a position  without any shift  is referred to as an extension. for instance  in third position on the a string  the hand naturally sits with the first finger on d♮ and the fourth on either g♮ or g♯. stretching the first finger back down to a c♯  or the fourth finger up to an a♮  forms an extension. extensions are commonly used where one or two notes are slightly out of an otherwise solid position  and give the benefit of being less intrusive than a shift or string crossing. the lowest position on the violin is referred to as  half position . in this position the first finger is on a  low first position  note  e.g. b♭ on the a string  and the fourth finger is in a downward extension from its regular position  e.g. d♮ on the a string  with the other two fingers placed in between as required. as the position of the thumb is typically the same in  half position  as in first position  it is better thought of as a backwards extension of the whole hand than as a genuine position. the upper limit of the violin s range is largely determined by the skill of the player  who may easily play more than two octaves on a single string  and four octaves on the instrument as a whole. position names are mostly used for the lower positions and in method books and etudes  for this reason  it is uncommon to hear references to anything higher than seventh position. the highest position  practically speaking  is 13th position. very high positions are a particular technical challenge  for two reasons. firstly  the difference in location of different notes becomes much narrower in high positions  making the notes more challenging to locate and in some cases to distinguish by ear.
secondly  the much shorter sounding length of the string in very high positions is a challenge for the right arm and bow in sounding the instrument effectively. the finer (and more expensive) an instrument  the better able it is to sustain good tone right to the top of the fingerboard  at the highest pitches on the e string. all notes (except those below the open d) can be played on more than one string. this is a standard design feature of stringed instruments  however  it differs from the piano  which has only one location for each of its 88 notes. for instance  the note of open a on the violin can be played as the open a  or on the d string (in first to fourth positions) or even on the g string (very high up in sixth to ninth positions). each string has a different tone quality  because of the different weights (thicknesses) of the strings and because of the resonances of other open strings. for instance  the g string is often regarded as having a very full  sonorous sound which is particularly appropriate to late romantic music. this is often indicated in the music by the marking  for example  sul g or iv (a roman numeral indicating to play on the fourth string  by convention  the strings are numbered from thinnest  highest pitch (i) to the lowest pitch (iv). even without an explicit instructions in the score  an advanced violinist will use her/his discretion and artistic sensibility to select which string to play specific notes or passages.   ==== open strings ==== if a string is bowed or plucked without any finger stopping it  it is said to be an  open string. this gives a different sound from a stopped string  since the string vibrates more freely at the nut than under a finger. further  it is impossible to use vibrato fully on an open string (though a partial effect can be achieved by stopping a note an octave up on an adjacent string and vibrating that  which introduces an element of vibrato into the overtones). in the classical tradition  violinists will often use a string crossing or shift of position to allow them to avoid the change of timbre introduced by an open string. this is particularly true for the open e which is often regarded as having a harsh sound. however  there are also situations where an open string may be specifically chosen for artistic effect (particularly in modern music)  in classical music which is imitating the drone of an organ (j. s. bach  in his partita in e for solo violin  achieved this)  fiddling (e.g.  hoedown) or where taking steps to avoid the open string is musically inappropriate (for instance in baroque music where shifting position was less common). in quick passages of scales or arpeggios an open e string may simply be used for convenience if
the note does not have time to ring and develop a harsh timbre. in folk music  fiddling and other traditional music genres  open strings are commonly used for their resonant timbre. playing an open string simultaneously with a stopped note on an adjacent string produces a bagpipe-like drone  often used by composers in imitation of folk music. sometimes the two notes are identical (for instance  playing a fingered a on the d string against the open a string)  giving a ringing sort of  fiddling  sound. playing an open string simultaneously with an identical stopped note can also be called for when more volume is required  especially in orchestral playing. some classical violin parts have notes for which the composer requests the violinist to play an open string  because of the specific sonority created by an open string.   ==== double stops  triple stops  chords and drones ==== double stopping is when two separate strings are stopped by the fingers  and bowed simultaneously  producing a sixth  third  fifth  etc. harmony. double-stops can be indicated in any position  though the widest interval that can be double-stopped naturally in one position is an octave (with the first finger on the lower string and the fourth finger on the higher string). nonetheless  intervals of tenths or even more are sometimes required to be double-stopped in advanced playing  resulting in a very stretched left-hand position with both fingers extended. the term  double stop  is often used to encompass sounding an open string alongside a fingered note. where three or four more simultaneous notes are written  the violinist will typically  split  the chord  choosing the lower one or two notes to play first before promptly continuing onto the upper one or two notes. a  triple stop  with three simultaneous notes is possible in some circumstances. the bow will not naturally strike three strings at once  but if there is sufficient pressure in the bowstroke the middle string can be bent down temporarily so all three can sound. this is accomplished with a heavy stroke  typically quite near the heel  and quite loud. double stops in orchestra are divided between the players if they are not at ease with them  with half of the musicians playing the lower note and the other half playing the higher note. sometimes  the composer will write  divisi  when he intends the two lines to be played separately. playing double stops is common when the violins do accompaniment and another instrument plays the melody.  in some baroque music neither split-chord nor triple-stop is appropriate and violinists will arpeggiate all chords (and even what appear to be regular double stops)  playing all notes individually as if they had been written as a slurred figure. in some musical styles  a sustained open string drone can be played during a passage mainly written on an adjacent string  to
provide a basic accompaniment. this is more often seen in folk traditions than in classical music. however  in baroque violins  triple-stopping came more naturally due to the bridge being less curved  so it could be played that way.   ==== vibrato ====  vibrato is a technique of the left hand and arm in which the pitch of a note varies subtly in a pulsating rhythm. while various parts of the hand or arm may be involved in the motion  the end result is a movement of the fingertip bringing about a slight change in vibrating string length  which causes an undulation in pitch. some violinists oscillate backwards  or lower in pitch from the actual note when using vibrato  since it is believed that perception favors the highest pitch in a varying sound. vibrato does little  if anything  to disguise an out-of-tune note  in other words  misapplied vibrato is a poor substitute for good intonation. scales and other exercises meant to work on intonation are typically played without vibrato to make the work easier and more effective. music students are often taught that unless otherwise marked in music  vibrato is assumed. however  it has to be noted that this is only a trend  there is nothing on the sheet music that compels violinists to add vibrato. this can be an obstacle to a classically trained violinist wishing to play in a style that uses little or no vibrato at all  such as baroque music played in period style and many traditional fiddling styles. vibrato can be produced by a proper combination of finger  wrist and arm motions. one method  called hand vibrato  involves rocking the hand back at the wrist to achieve oscillation  while another method  arm vibrato  modulates the pitch by rocking at the elbow. a combination of these techniques allows a player to produce a large variety of tonal effects. the  when  and  what for  and  how much  of violin vibrato are artistic matters of style and taste. different teachers  music schools and styles of music favour different vibrato styles. for example  overdone vibrato may become distracting. in acoustic terms  the interest that vibrato adds to the sound has to do with the way that the overtone mix (or tone color  or timbre) and the directional pattern of sound projection change with changes in pitch. by  pointing  the sound at different parts of the room in a rhythmic way  vibrato adds a  shimmer  or  liveliness  to the sound of a well-made violin. vibrato is  in a large part  left to the discretion of the violinist.  different types of vibrato will bring different moods to the piece  and the varying degrees and styles of vibrato are often characteristics that stand out in well-known violinists.   ==== vibrato trill ==== vibrato can also be used for a fast
trill. a trill initiated from just hammering the finger up and down on the fingerboard will create a harsher quality than with a vibrato trill. for example  if trilling on the first finger  the second finger is placed very slightly off the string and vibrato is implemented. the second finger will lightly touch the string above the first finger causing the pitch to change. this has a softer quality and many think it is nicer-sounding than a hammered trill. note  this trill technique only works well for semi-tonal trills  it is far more difficult to vibrato trill for an interval of a tone or more.   ==== harmonics ==== lightly touching the string with a fingertip at a harmonic node  but without fully pressing the string  and then plucking or bowing the string  creates harmonics. instead of the normal tone  a higher pitched note sounds.  each node is at an integer division of the string  for example half-way or one-third along the length of the string. a responsive instrument will sound numerous possible harmonic nodes along the length of the string. harmonics are marked in music either with a little circle above the note that determines the pitch of the harmonic  or by diamond-shaped note heads. there are two types of harmonics  natural harmonics and artificial harmonics (also known as false harmonics). natural harmonics are played on an open string. the pitch of the open string when it is plucked or bowed is called the fundamental frequency.  harmonics are also called overtones or partials. they occur at whole-number multiples of the fundamental  which is called the first harmonic.  the second harmonic is the first overtone (the octave above the open string)  the third harmonic is the second overtone  and so on. the second harmonic is in the middle of the string and sounds an octave higher than the string s pitch.  the third harmonic breaks the string into thirds and sounds an octave and a fifth above the fundamental  and the fourth harmonic breaks the string into quarters sounding two octaves above the first. the sound of the second harmonic is the clearest of them all  because it is a common node with all the succeeding even-numbered harmonics (4th  6th  etc.). the third and succeeding odd-numbered harmonics are harder to play because they break the string into an odd number of vibrating parts and do not share as many nodes with other harmonics. artificial harmonics are more difficult to produce than natural harmonics  as they involve both stopping the string and playing a harmonic on the stopped note. using the octave frame (the normal distance between the first and fourth fingers in any given position) with the fourth finger just touching the string a fourth higher than the stopped note produces the fourth harmonic  two octaves above the stopped note. finger placement and pressure  as well as bow speed  pressure  and sounding point are
all essential in getting the desired harmonic to sound. and to add to the challenge  in passages with different notes played as false harmonics  the distance between stopping finger and harmonic finger must constantly change  since the spacing between notes changes along the length of the string. the harmonic finger can also touch at a major third above the pressed note (the fifth harmonic)  or a fifth higher (a third harmonic).  these harmonics are less commonly used  in the case of the major third  both the stopped note and touched note must be played slightly sharp otherwise the harmonic does not speak as readily.  in the case of the fifth  the stretch is greater than is comfortable for many violinists. in the general repertoire fractions smaller than a sixth are not used.  however  divisions up to an eighth are sometimes used and  given a good instrument and a skilled player  divisions as small as a twelfth are possible. there are a few books dedicated solely to the study of violin harmonics. two comprehensive works are henryk heller s seven-volume theory of harmonics  published by simrock in 1928  and michelangelo abbado s five-volume tecnica dei suoni armonici published by ricordi in 1934. elaborate passages in artificial harmonics can be found in virtuoso violin literature  especially of the 19th and early 20th centuries. two notable examples of this are an entire section of vittorio monti s csárdás and a passage towards the middle of the third movement of pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky s violin concerto. a section of the third movement of violin concerto no. 1 (paganini) consists of double-stopped thirds in harmonics. when strings are worn  dirty and old  the harmonics may no longer be accurate in pitch. for this reason  violinists change their strings regularly.   === right hand and tone color === the strings may be sounded by drawing the hair of the bow held by the right hand across them (arco) or by plucking them (pizzicato) most often with the right hand. in some cases  the violinist will pluck strings with the left hand. this is done to facilitate transitions from pizz to arco playing. it is also used in some virtuoso showpieces. left hand pizzes are usually open strings. pizz is used on all of the violin family instruments  however  the systematic study of advanced pizzicato techniques is most developed in jazz bass  a style in which the instrument is mostly played pizzicato. the right arm  hand  and bow and the bow speed are responsible for tone quality  rhythm  dynamics  articulation  and most (but not all) changes in timbre. the player draws the bow over the string  causing the string to vibrate and produce a sustained tone. the bow is a wooden stick with tensioned horsetail hair  which has been rosined with a bar of rosin. the natural texture of the horsehair and the stickiness of the rosin
help the bow to  grip  the string  and thus when the bow is drawn over the string  the bow causes the string to sound a pitch.  bowing can be used to produce long sustained notes or melodies. with a string section  if the players in a section change their bows at different times  a note can seem to be endlessly sustainable. as well  the bow can be used to play short  crisp little notes  such as repeated notes  scales and arpeggios  which provide a propulsive rhythm in many styles of music.    ==== bowing techniques ==== the most essential part of bowing technique is the bow grip. it is usually with the thumb bent in the small area between the frog and the winding of the bow. the other fingers are spread somewhat evenly across the top part of the bow. the pinky finger is curled with the tip of the finger placed on the wood next to the screw. the violin produces louder notes with greater bow speed or more weight on the string.  the two methods are not equivalent  because they produce different timbres  pressing down on the string tends to produce a harsher  more intense sound. one can also achieve a louder sound by placing the bow closer to the bridge. the sounding point where the bow intersects the string also influences timbre (or  tone colour ). playing close to the bridge (sul ponticello) gives a more intense sound than usual  emphasizing the higher harmonics  and playing with the bow over the end of the fingerboard (sul tasto) makes for a delicate  ethereal sound  emphasizing the fundamental frequency. dr. suzuki referred to the sounding point as the kreisler highway  one may think of different sounding points as lanes in the highway. various methods of attack with the bow produce different articulations. there are many bowing techniques that allow for every range of playing style and many teachers  players  and orchestras spend a lot of time developing techniques and creating a unified technique within the group. these techniques include legato-style bowing (a smooth  connected  sustained sound suitable for melodies)  collé  and a variety of bowings which produce shorter notes  including ricochet  sautillé  martelé  spiccato  and staccato.   ==== pizzicato ==== a note marked pizz. (abbreviation for pizzicato) in the written music is to be played by plucking the string with a finger of the right hand rather than by bowing. (the index finger is most commonly used here.) sometimes in orchestra parts or virtuoso solo music where the bow hand is occupied (or for show-off effect)  left-hand pizzicato will be indicated by a + (plus sign) below or above the note.  in left-hand pizzicato  two fingers are put on the string  one (usually the index or middle finger) is put on the correct note  and the other (usually the
ring finger or little finger) is put above the note. the higher finger then plucks the string while the lower one stays on  thus producing the correct pitch. by increasing the force of the pluck  one can increase the volume of the note that the string is producing. pizzicato is used in orchestral works and in solo showpieces. in orchestral parts  violinists often have to make very quick shifts from arco to pizzicato  and vice versa.   ==== col legno ==== a marking of col legno (italian for  with the wood ) in the written music calls for striking the string(s) with the stick of the bow  rather than by drawing the hair of the bow across the strings.  this bowing technique is somewhat rarely used  and results in a muted percussive sound. the eerie quality of a violin section playing col legno is exploited in some symphonic pieces  notably the  witches  dance  of the last movement of berlioz s symphonie fantastique. saint-saëns s symphonic poem danse macabre includes the string section using the col legno technique to imitate the sound of dancing skeletons.  mars  from gustav holst s  the planets  uses col legno to play a repeated rhythm in 54 time signature. benjamin britten s the young person s guide to the orchestra demands its use in the  percussion  variation. dmitri shostakovich uses it in his fourteenth symphony in the movement  at the sante jail . some violinists  however  object to this style of playing as it can damage the finish and impair the value of a fine bow  but most of such will compromise by using a cheap bow for at least the duration of the passage in question. detaché a smooth and even stroke during which bow speed and weight are the same from beginning of the stroke to the end.   ==== martelé ==== literally hammered  a strongly accented effect produced by releasing each bowstroke forcefully and suddenly. martelé can be played in any part of the bow. it is sometimes indicated in written music by an arrowhead.   ==== tremolo ==== tremolo is the very rapid repetition (typically of a single note  but occasionally of multiple notes)  usually played at the tip of the bow. tremolo is marked with three short  slanted lines across the stem of the note. tremolo is often used as a sound effect in orchestral music  particularly in the romantic music era (1800-1910) and in opera music.   ==== mute or sordino ====  attaching a small metal  rubber  leather  or wooden device called a mute  or sordino  to the bridge of the violin gives a softer  more mellow tone  with fewer audible overtones  the sound of an entire orchestral string section playing with mutes has a hushed quality. the mute changes both the loudness and the timbre ( tone colour ) of a
violin. the conventional italian markings for mute usage are con sord.  or con sordino  meaning  with mute  and senza sord.  meaning  without mute  or via sord.  meaning  mute off .  larger metal  rubber  or wooden mutes are widely available  known as practice mutes or hotel mutes.  such mutes are generally not used in performance  but are used to deaden the sound of the violin in practice areas such as hotel rooms. (for practicing purposes there is also the mute violin  a violin without a sound box.) some composers have used practice mutes for special effect  for example  at the end of luciano berio s sequenza viii for solo violin.   == musical styles ==   === classical music ===  since the baroque era  the violin has been one of the most important of all instruments in classical music  for several reasons.  the tone of the violin stands out above other instruments  making it appropriate for playing a melody line.  in the hands of a good player  the violin is extremely agile  and can execute rapid and difficult sequences of notes. violins make up a large part of an orchestra  and are usually divided into two sections  known as the first and second violins. composers often assign the melody to the first violins  typically a more difficult part using higher positions  while second violins play harmony  accompaniment patterns or the melody an octave lower than the first violins. a string quartet similarly has parts for first and second violins  as well as a viola part  and a bass instrument  such as the cello or  rarely  the double bass.   === jazz === the earliest references to jazz performance using the violin as a solo instrument are documented during the first decades of the 20th century. joe venuti  one of the first jazz violinists  is known for his work with guitarist eddie lang during the 1920s. since that time there have been many improvising violinists including stéphane grappelli  stuff smith  eddie south  regina carter  johnny frigo  john blake  adam taubitz  leroy jenkins  and jean-luc ponty. while not primarily jazz violinists  darol anger and mark o connor have spent significant parts of their careers playing jazz. the swiss-cuban violinist yilian cañizares mixes jazz with cuban music.violins also appear in ensembles supplying orchestral backgrounds to many jazz recordings.   === indian classical music === the indian violin  while essentially the same instrument as that used in western music  is different in some senses. the instrument is tuned so that the iv and iii strings (g and d on a western-tuned violin) and the ii and i (a and e) strings are sa–pa (do–sol) pairs and sound the same but are offset by an octave  resembling common scordatura or fiddle cross-tunings such as
g–d–g–d or a–e–a–e. the tonic sa (do) is not fixed  but variably tuned to accommodate the vocalist or lead player. the way the musician holds the instrument varies from western to indian music. in indian music the musician sits on the floor cross-legged with the right foot out in front of them. the scroll of the instrument rests on the foot. this position is essential to playing well due to the nature of indian music. the hand can move all over the fingerboard and there is no set position for the left hand  so it is important for the violin to be in a steady  unmoving position.   === popular music ===    up through at least the 1970s  most types of popular music used bowed string sections. they were extensively used in popular music throughout the 1920s and early 1930s. with the rise of swing music  however  from 1935 to 1945  the string sound was often used to add to the fullness of big band music. following the swing era  from the late 1940s to the mid-1950s  strings began to be revived in traditional pop music. this trend accelerated in the late 1960s  with a significant revival of the use of strings  especially in soul music. popular motown recordings of the late 1960s and 1970s relied heavily on strings as part of their trademark texture. the rise of disco music in the 1970s continued this trend with the heavy use of string instruments in popular disco orchestras (e.g.  love unlimited orchestra  biddu orchestra  monster orchestra  salsoul orchestra  mfsb).with the rise of electronically created music in the 1980s  violins declined in use  as synthesized string sounds played by a keyboardist with a synthesizer took their place. however  while the violin has had very little usage in mainstream rock music  it has some history in progressive rock (e.g.  electric light orchestra  king crimson  kansas  gentle giant). the 1973 album contaminazione by italy s rdm plays violins off against synthesizers at its finale ( la grande fuga ). the instrument has a stronger place in modern jazz fusion bands  notably the corrs.  the fiddle is sometimes a part of british folk rock music  as exemplified by the likes of fairport convention and steeleye span.the popularity of crossover music beginning in the last years of the 20th century has brought the violin back into the popular music arena  with both electric and acoustic violins being used by popular bands. dave matthews band features violinist boyd tinsley.  the flock featured violinist jerry goodman who later joined the jazz-rock fusion band  the mahavishnu orchestra.  james  saul davies  who is also a guitarist  was enlisted by the band as a violinist. for their first three albums and related singles  the british group no-man made extensive use of electric and acoustic solo violin as played by band member ben coleman (who
played violin exclusively).pop-punk band yellowcard has made a mainstay of violin in its music. violinist sean mackin has been a member of the band since 1997. los salvadores also combine punk and ska influences with a violin. doom metal band my dying bride have used violin as a part of their line-up throughout many of their albums. the violin appears prominently in the music of spanish folk metal group mägo de oz (for example  in their 1998 hit  molinos de viento ). the violinist (carlos prieto a.k.a.  mohamed ) has been one of the group s most popular members with fans since 1992. the instrument is also used often in symphonic metal  particularly by bands such as therion  nightwish  within temptation  haggard  and epica  although it can also be found in gothic metal bands such as tristania and theater of tragedy. the alternative rock band hurt s vocalist plays violin for the band  making them one of few rock bands to feature violin without hiring a session worker. the folk metal band ithilien use violin extensively along their discography. progressive metal band ne obliviscaris feature a violin player  tim charles  in their line-up.independent artists  such as owen pallett  the shondes  and andrew bird  have also spurred increased interest in the instrument. indie bands have often embraced new and unusual arrangements  allowing them more freedom to feature the violin than many mainstream musical artists.  it has been used in the post-rock genre by bands such as a genuine freakshow  sigur rós  zox  broken social scene  and a silver mt. zion. the electric violin has even been used by bands like the crüxshadows within the context of keyboard based music. lindsey stirling plays the violin in conjunction with electronic/dubstep/trance rifts and beats.eric stanley improvises on the violin with hip hop music/pop/classical elements and instrumental beats. the successful indie rock and baroque pop band arcade fire use violins extensively in their arrangements. indian  turkish  and arabic pop music is filled with the sound of violins  both soloists and ensembles.   === folk music and fiddling ===  like many other instruments used in classical music  the violin descends from remote ancestors that were used for folk music.  following a stage of intensive development in the late renaissance  largely in italy  the violin had improved (in volume  tone  and agility)  to the point that it not only became a very important instrument in art music  but proved highly appealing to folk musicians as well  ultimately spreading very widely  sometimes displacing earlier bowed instruments. ethnomusicologists have observed its widespread use in europe  asia  and the americas. when played as a folk instrument  the violin is usually referred to in english as a fiddle (although the term fiddle can be used informally no matter what the genre of music). worldwide  there are various stringed instruments such as the
wheel fiddle and apache fiddle that are also called  fiddles . fiddle music differs from classical in that the tunes are generally considered dance music  and various techniques  such as droning  shuffling  and ornamentation specific to particular styles are used. in many traditions of folk music  the tunes are not written but are memorized by successive generations of musicians and passed on in what is known as the oral tradition. many old-time pieces call for cross-tuning  or using tunings other than standard gdae. some players of american styles of folk fiddling (such as bluegrass or old-time) have their bridge s top edge cut to a slightly flatter curve  making techniques such as a  double shuffle  less taxing on the bow arm  as it reduces the range of motion needed for alternating between double stops on different string pairs. fiddlers who use solid steel core strings may prefer to use a tailpiece with fine tuners on all four strings  instead of the single fine tuner on the e string used by many classical players.   === arabic music === as well as the arabic rababah  the violin has been used in arabic music.   == electric violins ==  electric violins have a magnetic or piezoelectric pickup that converts string vibration to an electric signal. a patch cable or wireless transmitter sends the signal to an amplifier of a pa system. electric violins are usually constructed as such  but a pickup can be added to a conventional acoustic violin. an electric violin with a resonating body that produces listening-level sound independently of the electric elements can be called an electro-acoustic violin. to be effective as an acoustic violin  electro-acoustic violins retain much of the resonating body of the violin  and often resemble an acoustic violin or fiddle.  the body may be finished in bright colors and made from alternative materials to wood. these violins may need to be hooked up to an instrument amplifier or pa system.  some types come with a silent option that allows the player to use headphones that are hooked up to the violin. the first specially built electric violins date back to 1928 and were made by victor pfeil  oskar vierling  george eisenberg  benjamin miessner  george beauchamp  hugo benioff and fredray kislingbury. these violins can be plugged into effect units  just like an electric guitar  including distortion  wah-wah pedal and reverb. since electric violins do not rely on string tension and resonance to amplify their sound they can have more strings. for example  five-stringed electric violins are available from several manufacturers  and a seven string electric violin (with three lower strings encompassing the cello s range) is also available. the majority of the first electric violinists were musicians playing jazz fusion (e.g.  jean-luc ponty) and popular music.   == violin authentication ==  violin authentication is the process of determining the maker and manufacture date of
a violin. this process is similar to that used to determine the provenance of art works.  as significant value may be attached to violins made either by specific makers or at specific times and locations  forgery and other methods of fraudulent misrepresentation can be used to inflate the value of an instrument.   == see also ==   == notes ==   == references ==   == further reading == lalitha  muthuswamy (2004). violin techniques in western and south indian classical music  a comparative study. sundeep prakashan. isbn 9788175741515. schoenbaum  david  the violin  a social history of the world s most versatile instrument  new york  new york   w.w. norton & company  december 2012. isbn 9780393084405. templeton  david  fresh prince  joshua bell on composition  hyperviolins  and the future  strings magazine  october 2002  no. 105. young  diana. a methodology for investigation of bowed string performance through measurement of violin bowing technique. phd thesis. m.i.t.  2007.   == external links == the violin  how to select a violin  its provenance and value harrison  robert william frederick (1911).  violin  . encyclopædia britannica. 28 (11th ed.). pp. 102–107. researches into the early history of the violin family (carl engel  1883) - (authentication required.) a new history of violin playing  the vibrato and lambert massart s revolutionary discovery (zdenko silvela 2001)
the flute is a family of musical instruments in the woodwind group. unlike woodwind instruments with reeds  a flute is an aerophone or reedless wind instrument that produces its sound from the flow of air across an opening. according to the instrument classification of hornbostel–sachs  flutes are categorized as edge-blown aerophones. a musician who plays the flute can be referred to as a flute player  flautist  flutist or  less commonly  fluter or flutenist. flutes are the earliest extant musical instruments  as paleolithic instruments with hand-bored holes have been found. a number of flutes dating to about 43 000 to 35 000 years ago have been found in the swabian jura region of present-day germany. these flutes demonstrate that a developed musical tradition existed from the earliest period of modern human presence in europe.   == etymology and terminology ==  the word flute first entered the english language during the middle english period  as floute  or else flowte  flo(y)te  possibly from old french flaute and from old provençal flaüt  or else from old french fleüte  flaüte  flahute via middle high german floite or dutch fluit. the english verb flout has the same linguistic root  and the modern dutch verb fluiten still shares the two meanings. attempts to trace the word back to the latin flare (to blow  inflate) have been pronounced  phonologically impossible  or  inadmissable .  the first known use of the word flute was in the 14th century. according to the oxford english dictionary  this was in geoffrey chaucer s the hous of fame  c.1380.today  a musician who plays any instrument in the flute family can be called a flutist (pronounced  flew-tist  most common in the us)  or flautist (pronounced  flaw-tist  most common in the uk)  or simply a flute player (more neutrally). flutist dates back to at least 1603  the earliest quotation cited by the oxford english dictionary. flautist was used in 1860 by nathaniel hawthorne in the marble faun  after being adopted during the 18th century from italy (flautista  itself from flauto)  like many musical terms in england since the italian renaissance. other english terms  now virtually obsolete  are fluter (15th–19th centuries) and flutenist (17th–18th centuries).   == history ==  the oldest flute ever discovered may be a fragment of the femur of a juvenile cave bear  with two to four holes  found at divje babe in slovenia and dated to about 43 000 years ago. however  this has been disputed. in 2008 another flute dated back to at least 35 000 years ago was discovered in hohle fels cave near ulm  germany. the five-holed flute has a v-shaped mouthpiece and is made from a vulture wing bone. the researchers involved in the discovery officially published their findings in the journal nature  in august 2009. the discovery was also the oldest confirmed find of any musical
instrument in history  until a redating of flutes found in geißenklösterle cave revealed them to be even older with an age of 42 000 to 43 000 years.the flute  one of several found  was found in the hohle fels cavern next to the venus of hohle fels and a short distance from the oldest known human carving. on announcing the discovery  scientists suggested that the  finds demonstrate the presence of a well-established musical tradition at the time when modern humans colonized europe . scientists have also suggested that the discovery of the flute may help to explain  the probable behavioural and cognitive gulf between  neanderthals and early modern human.a three-holed flute  18.7 cm long  made from a mammoth tusk (from the geißenklösterle cave  near ulm  in the southern german swabian alb and dated to 30 000 to 37 000 years ago) was discovered in 2004  and two flutes made from swan bones excavated a decade earlier (from the same cave in germany  dated to circa 36 000 years ago) are among the oldest known musical instruments.  a playable 9 000-year-old gudi (literally   bone flute ) was excavated from a tomb in jiahu along with 29 defunct twins  made from the wing bones of red-crowned cranes with five to eight holes each  in the central chinese province of henan. the earliest extant chinese transverse flute is a chi (篪) flute discovered in the tomb of marquis yi of zeng at the suizhou site  hubei province  china. it dates from 433 bc  of the later zhou dynasty. it is fashioned of lacquered bamboo with closed ends and has five stops that are at the flute s side instead of the top. chi flutes are mentioned in shi jing  compiled and edited by confucius  according to tradition. the earliest written reference to a flute is from a sumerian-language cuneiform tablet dated to c. 2600–2700 bce. flutes are also mentioned in a recently translated tablet of the epic of gilgamesh  an epic poem whose development spanned the period of approximately 2100–600 bce. additionally  a set of cuneiform tablets knows as the  musical texts  provide precise tuning instructions for seven scale of a stringed instrument (assumed to be a babylonian lyre). one of those scales is named embūbum  which is an akkadian word for  flute .the bible  in genesis 4 21  cites jubal as being the  father of all those who play the ugab and the kinnor . the former hebrew term is believed by some to refer to some wind instrument  or wind instruments in general  the latter to a stringed instrument  or stringed instruments in general. as such  jubal is regarded in the judeo-christian tradition as the inventor of the flute (a word used in some translations of this biblical passage).  elsewhere in the bible  the flute is referred to as  chalil  (from the root
word for  hollow )  in particular in 1 samuel 10 5  1 kings 1 40  isaiah 5 12 and 30 29  and jeremiah 48 36. archeological digs in the holy land have discovered flutes from both the bronze age (c. 4000-1200 bce) and the iron age (1200-586 bce)  the latter era  witness[ing] the creation of the israelite kingdom and its separation into the two kingdoms of israel and judea. some early flutes were made out of tibias (shin bones). the flute has also always been an essential part of indian culture and mythology  and the cross flute believed by several accounts to originate in india as indian literature from 1500 bce has made vague references to the cross flute.   == acoustics == a flute produces sound when a stream of air directed across a hole in the instrument creates a vibration of air at the hole. the airstream creates a bernoulli or siphon. this excites the air contained in the usually cylindrical resonant cavity within the flute. the flutist changes the pitch of the sound produced by opening and closing holes in the body of the instrument  thus changing the effective length of the resonator and its corresponding resonant frequency. by varying the air pressure  a flutist can also change the pitch by causing the air in the flute to resonate at a harmonic rather than the fundamental frequency without opening or closing any holes.head joint geometry appears particularly critical to acoustic performance and tone  but there is no clear consensus on a particular shape amongst manufacturers. acoustic impedance of the embouchure hole appears the most critical parameter. critical variables affecting this acoustic impedance include  chimney length (hole between lip-plate and head tube)  chimney diameter  and radii or curvature of the ends of the chimney and any designed restriction in the  throat  of the instrument  such as that in the japanese nohkan flute. a study in which professional flutists were blindfolded could find no significant differences between flutes made from a variety of metals. in two different sets of blind listening  no flute was correctly identified in a first listening  and in a second  only the silver flute was identified. the study concluded that there was  no evidence that the wall material has any appreciable effect on the sound color or dynamic range .   == categories ==  in its most basic form  a flute is an open tube which is blown into. after focused study and training  players use controlled air-direction to create an airstream in which the air is aimed downward into the tone hole of the flute s headjoint. there are several broad classes of flutes. with most flutes  the musician blows directly across the edge of the mouthpiece  with 1/4 of their bottom lip covering the embouchure hole. however  some flutes  such as the whistle  gemshorn  flageolet  recorder  tin whistle  tonette 
fujara  and ocarina have a duct that directs the air onto the edge (an arrangement that is termed a  fipple ). these are known as fipple flutes. the fipple gives the instrument a distinct timbre which is different from non-fipple flutes and makes the instrument easier to play  but takes a degree of control away from the musician. another division is between side-blown (or transverse) flutes  such as the western concert flute  piccolo  fife  dizi and bansuri  and end-blown flutes  such as the ney  xiao  kaval  danso  shakuhachi  anasazi flute and quena. the player of a side-blown flute uses a hole on the side of the tube to produce a tone  instead of blowing on an end of the tube. end-blown flutes should not be confused with fipple flutes such as the recorder  which are also played vertically but have an internal duct to direct the air flow across the edge of the tone hole. flutes may be open at one or both ends. the ocarina  xun  pan pipes  police whistle  and bosun s whistle are closed-ended. open-ended flutes such as the concert flute and the recorder have more harmonics  and thus more flexibility for the player  and brighter timbres. an organ pipe may be either open or closed  depending on the sound desired. flutes may have any number of pipes or tubes  though one is the most common number. flutes with multiple resonators may be played one resonator at a time (as is typical with pan pipes) or more than one at a time (as is typical with double flutes). flutes can be played with several different air sources. conventional flutes are blown with the mouth  although some cultures use nose flutes. the flue pipes of organs  which are acoustically similar to duct flutes  are blown by bellows or fans.   === western transverse flutes ===   ==== wooden one-keyed transverse flute ==== usually in d  wooden transverse flutes were played in european classical music mainly in the period from the early 18th century to the early 19th century. as such the instrument is often indicated as baroque flute. gradually marginalized by the western concert flute in the 19th century  baroque flutes were again played from the late 20th century as part of the historically informed performance practice.   ==== western concert flute ====  the western concert flute  a descendant of the medieval german flute  is a transverse treble flute that is closed at the top. an embouchure hole is positioned near the top across and into which the flutist blows. the flute has circular tone holes larger than the finger holes of its baroque predecessors. the size and placement of tone holes  key mechanism  and fingering system used to produce the notes in the flute s range were evolved from 1832 to 1847 by theobald boehm and greatly improved the instrument s dynamic
range and intonation over its predecessors. with some refinements (and the rare exception of the kingma system and other custom adapted fingering systems)  western concert flutes typically conform to boehm s design  known as the boehm system. beginner s flutes are made of nickel  silver  or brass that is silver-plated  while professionals use solid silver  gold  and sometimes platinum flutes. there are also modern wooden-bodied flutes usually with silver or gold keywork. the wood is usually african blackwood. the standard concert flute is pitched in c and has a range of three octaves starting from middle c or one half step lower when a b foot is attached. this means the concert flute is one of the highest common orchestra and concert band instruments.   ==== western concert flute variants ====  the piccolo plays an octave higher than the regular treble flute.  lower members of the flute family include the g alto and c bass flutes that are used occasionally  and are pitched a perfect fourth and an octave below the concert flute  respectively. the contrabass  double contrabass  and hyperbass are other rare forms of the flute pitched two  three  and four octaves below middle c respectively. other sizes of flutes and piccolos are used from time to time. a rarer instrument of the modern pitching system is the treble g flute. instruments made according to an older pitch standard  used principally in wind-band music  include d♭ piccolo  soprano flute (the primary instrument  equivalent to today s concert c flute)  f alto flute  and b♭ bass flute.   === indian flutes ===  the bamboo flute is an important instrument in indian classical music  and developed independently of the western flute. the hindu god lord krishna is traditionally considered a master of the bamboo flute. the indian flutes are very simple compared to the western counterparts  they are made of bamboo and are keyless.two main varieties of indian flutes are currently used. the first  the bansuri (बांसुरी)  has six finger holes and one embouchure hole  and is used predominantly in the hindustani music of northern india. the second  the venu or pullanguzhal  has eight finger holes  and is played predominantly in the carnatic music of southern india. presently  the eight-holed flute with cross-fingering technique is common among many carnatic flutists. prior to this  the south indian flute had only seven finger holes  with the fingering standard developed by sharaba shastri  of the palladam school  at the beginning of the 20th century.  the quality of the flute s sound depends somewhat on the specific bamboo used to make it  and it is generally agreed that the best bamboo grows in the nagercoil area of south india.based on bharata natya shastra sarana chatushtai  avinash balkrishna patwardhan in 1998 developed a methodology to produce perfectly tuned flutes for the ten  thatas  currently present in
indian classical music.in a regional dialect of gujarati  a flute is also called pavo. some people can also play pair of flutes (jodiyo pavo) simultaneously.   === chinese flutes ===  in china there are many varieties of dizi (笛子)  or chinese flute  with different sizes  structures (with or without a resonance membrane) and number of holes (from 6 to 11) and intonations (different keys).  most are made of bamboo  but can come in wood  jade  bone  and iron. one peculiar feature of the chinese flute is the use of a resonance membrane mounted on one of the holes that vibrates with the air column inside the tube. this membrane is called a di mo  which is usually a thin tissue paper.  it gives the flute a bright sound. commonly seen flutes in the modern chinese orchestra are the bangdi (梆笛)  qudi (曲笛)  xindi (新笛)  and dadi (大笛). the bamboo flute played vertically is called the xiao (簫)  which is a different category of wind instrument in china.   === japanese flutes ===  the japanese flute  called the fue  笛 (hiragana  ふえ)  encompasses a large number of musical flutes from japan  include the end-blown shakuhachi and hotchiku  as well as the transverse gakubue  komabue  ryūteki  nōkan  shinobue  kagurabue and minteki.   === sodina and suling ===  the sodina is an end-blown flute found throughout the island state of madagascar  located in the indian ocean off southeastern africa. one of the oldest instruments on the island  it bears close resemblance to end-blown flutes found in southeast asia and particularly indonesia  where it is known as the suling  suggesting the predecessor to the sodina was carried to madagascar in outrigger canoes by the island s original settlers emigrating from borneo. an image of the most celebrated contemporary sodina flutist  rakoto frah (d. 2001)  was featured on the local currency.   === sring === the sring (also called blul) is a relatively small  end-blown flute with a nasal tone quality found in the caucasus region of eastern armenia. it is made of wood or cane  usually with seven finger holes and one thumb hole  producing a diatonic scale. one armenian musicologist believes the sring to be the most characteristic of national armenian instruments.   == see also == bansuri flute method diple frula hand flute irish flute jazz flute native american flute palendag pipe and tabor washint pipe (instrument)   == references ==   == bibliography ==   == external links == ardal powell.  flute.  grove music online. oxford music online. oxford university press. (by subscription) essay on the jiahu flutes from the heilbrunn timeline of art history at the metropolitan museum of art a selection of historic flutes from around the world at the metropolitan museum of art walking stick flute and oboe  georg henrich scherer
 butzbach  ca. 1750–57 glass flute  claude laurent  paris  1813 porcelain flute  saxony  1760–1790 pair of ivory flutes by johann wilhelm oberlender  mid 18th century  nuremberg flute by garion  paris  ca. 1720–1740 nature.com new flutes document the earliest musical tradition in southwestern germany flute at curlie flute acoustics resources on flute acoustics from the university of new south wales. folk flutes (polish folk musical instruments)
conducting is the art of directing a musical performance  such as an orchestral or choral concert. it has been defined as  the art of directing the simultaneous performance of several players or singers by the use of gesture.  the primary duties of the conductor are to interpret the score in a way which reflects the specific indications in that score  set the tempo  ensure correct entries by ensemble members  and  shape  the phrasing where appropriate. conductors communicate with their musicians primarily through hand gestures  usually with the aid of a baton  and may use other gestures or signals such as eye contact. a conductor usually supplements their direction with verbal instructions to their musicians in rehearsal.the conductor typically stands on a raised podium with a large music stand for the full score  which contains the musical notation for all the instruments or voices. since the mid-19th century  most conductors have not played an instrument when conducting  although in earlier periods of classical music history  leading an ensemble while playing an instrument was common. in baroque music from the 1600s to the 1750s  the group would typically be led by the harpsichordist or first violinist (see concertmaster)  an approach that in modern times has been revived by several music directors for music from this period. conducting while playing a piano or synthesizer may also be done with musical theatre pit orchestras. communication is typically non-verbal during a performance (this is strictly the case in art music  but in jazz big bands or large pop ensembles  there may be occasional spoken instructions  such as a  count in ). however  in rehearsals  frequent interruptions allow the conductor to give verbal directions as to how the music should be played or sung. conductors act as guides to the orchestras or choirs they conduct. they choose the works to be performed and study their scores  to which they may make certain adjustments (such as in tempo  articulation  phrasing  repetitions of sections)  work out their interpretation  and relay their vision to the performers. they may also attend to organizational matters  such as scheduling rehearsals  planning a concert season  hearing auditions and selecting members  and promoting their ensemble in the media. orchestras  choirs  concert bands and other sizable musical ensembles such as big bands are usually led by conductors.   == nomenclature == the principal conductor of an orchestra or opera company is sometimes referred to as a music director or chief conductor  or by the german words kapellmeister or dirigent. conductors of choirs or choruses are sometimes referred to as choral director  chorus master  or choirmaster  particularly for choirs associated with an orchestra. conductors of concert bands  military bands  marching bands and other bands may hold the title of band director  bandmaster  or drum major. respected senior conductors are sometimes referred to by the italian
word  maestro  which translates as  master  or  teacher .   == history ==   === middle ages to 18th century === an early form of conducting is cheironomy  the use of hand gestures to indicate melodic shape. this has been practiced at least as far back as the middle ages. in the christian church  the person giving these symbols held a staff to signify his role  and it seems that as music became rhythmically more complex  the staff was moved up and down to indicate the beat  acting as an early form of baton.in the 17th century  other devices to indicate the passing of time came into use. rolled sheets of paper  smaller sticks and unadorned hands are all shown in pictures from this period. the large staff was responsible for the death of jean-baptiste lully  who injured his foot with one while conducting a te deum for the king s recovery from illness. the wound became gangrenous and lully refused amputation  whereupon the gangrene spread to his leg and he died two months later.in instrumental music throughout the 18th century  a member of the ensemble usually acted as the conductor. this was sometimes the concertmaster  who could use his bow as a baton  or a lutenist who would move the neck of his instrument in time with the beat. it was common to conduct from the harpsichord in pieces that had a basso continuo part. in opera performances  there were sometimes two conductors  with the keyboard player in charge of the singers and the principal violinist or leader was in charge of the orchestra.on fri  30 sep 1791 in vienna  mozart s opera die zauberflöte (the magic flute) premiered at the theater auf der wieden  with mozart himself conducting the orchestra  according to documents and publicity posters from that time.in 1798  joseph haydn conducted the premiere of creation with his hands and a baton while  kapellmeister weigl [sat] at the fortepiano.    === 19th century ===  by the early 19th century (ca. 1820)  it became the norm to have a dedicated conductor  who did not also play an instrument during the performance. while some orchestras protested the introduction of the conductor  since they were used to having a concertmaster or keyboard player act as leader  eventually the role of a conductor was established. the size of the usual orchestra expanded during this period  and the use of a baton became more common  as it was easier to see than bare hands or rolled-up paper. among the earliest notable conductors were louis spohr  carl maria von weber  louis-antoine jullien and felix mendelssohn  all of whom were also composers. mendelssohn is claimed to have been the first conductor to utilize a wooden baton to keep time  a practice still generally in use in the 2010s. prominent conductors who did not or do not
use a baton include pierre boulez  kurt masur  james conlon  yuri temirkanov  leopold stokowski  vasily safonov  eugene ormandy (for a period)  and dimitri mitropoulos.the composers hector berlioz and richard wagner attained greatness as conductors  and they wrote two of the earliest essays dedicated to the subject. berlioz is considered the first virtuoso conductor. wagner was largely responsible for shaping the conductor s role as one who imposes his own view of a piece onto the performance rather than one who is just responsible for ensuring entries are made at the right time and that there is a unified beat. predecessors who focused on conducting include françois habeneck  who founded the orchestre de la société des concerts du conservatoire in 1828  though berlioz was later to be alarmed at habeneck s loose standards of rehearsal. pianist and composer franz liszt was also a conductor. wagner s one-time champion hans von bülow (1830–1894) was particularly celebrated as a conductor  although he also maintained his initial career as a pianist  an instrument on which he was regarded as among the greatest performers (he was a prized piano student of franz liszt  whose daughter cosima he married – although she was to abandon him for wagner. liszt was a major figure in the history of conducting  who attained remarkable performances). bülow raised the technical standards of conducting to an unprecedented level through such innovations as separate  detailed rehearsals of different sections of the orchestra ( sectional rehearsal ). in his posts as head of (sequentially) the bavarian state opera  meiningen court orchestra  and berlin philharmonic he brought a level of nuance and subtlety to orchestral performance previously heard only in solo instrumental playing  and in doing so made a profound impression on young artists like richard strauss  who at the age of 20 served as his assistant  and felix weingartner  who came to disapprove of his interpretations but was deeply impressed by his orchestral standards. composer gustav mahler was also a noted conductor.   === 20th century === technical standards were brought to new levels by the next generation of conductors  including arthur nikisch (1855–1922)  who succeeded bülow as music director of the berlin philharmonic in 1895. nikisch had previously served as head of the leipzig opera  boston symphony orchestra  and leipzig gewandhaus orchestra  and was to serve as music director of the london symphony orchestra. nikisch premiered important works by anton bruckner and pyotr ilyich tchaikovsky  who greatly admired his work  johannes brahms  after hearing him conduct his fourth symphony  said it was  quite exemplary  it s impossible to hear it any better.  nikisch took the london symphony orchestra on tour through the united states in april 1912  the first american tour by a european orchestra. he also made one of the earliest recordings of a complete symphony  the beethoven fifth with the berlin philharmonic in november 1913. nikisch
was also the first conductor to have his art captured on film – alas  silently. the film confirms reports that he made particularly mesmerizing use of eye contact and expression to communicate with an orchestra  such later conductors as fritz reiner stated that this aspect of his technique had a strong influence on their own. conductors of the generations after nikisch often left extensive recorded evidence of their arts. two particularly influential and widely recorded figures are often treated  somewhat inaccurately  as interpretive antipodes. they were the italian conductor arturo toscanini (1867–1957) and the german conductor wilhelm furtwängler (1886–1954). toscanini played in orchestras under giuseppe verdi and made his debut conducting aida in 1886  filling in at the last minute for an indisposed conductor. he is to this day regarded by such authorities as james levine as the greatest of all verdi conductors. but toscanini s repertory was wide  and it was in his interpretations of the german symphonists beethoven and brahms that he was particularly renowned and influential  favoring stricter and faster tempi than a conductor like bülow or  before him  wagner. still  his style shows more inflection than his reputation may suggest  and he was particularly gifted at revealing detail and getting orchestras to play in a singing manner. furtwängler  whom many regard as the greatest interpreter of wagner (although toscanini was also admired in this composer) and bruckner  conducted beethoven and brahms with a good deal of inflection of tempo – but generally in a manner that revealed the structure and direction of the music particularly clearly. he was an accomplished composer as well as performer  and a disciple of the theorist heinrich schenker  who emphasized concern for underlying long-range harmonic tensions and resolutions in a piece  a strength of furtwängler s conducting. along with his interest in the large-scale  furtwängler also shaped the details of the piece in a particularly compelling and expressive manner.  the two men had very different techniques  toscanini s was italianate  with a long  large baton and clear beats (often not using his left hand)  furtwängler beat time with less apparent precision  because he wanted a more rounded sound (although it is a myth that his technique was vague  many musicians have attested that he was easy to follow in his own way). in any event  their examples illustrate a larger point about conducting technique in the first half of the 20th century  it was not standardized. great and influential conductors of the middle 20th century like leopold stokowski (1882–1977)  otto klemperer (1885–1973)  herbert von karajan (1908–1989) and leonard bernstein (1918–1990) – incidentally  the first american conductor to attain greatness and international fame – had widely varied techniques. karajan and bernstein formed another apparent antipode in the 1960s–80s  karajan as music director of the berlin philharmonic (1955–89) and bernstein as  for part of that period  music director of the new york philharmonic
(1957–69)  and later frequent guest conductor in europe. karajan s technique was highly controlled  and eventually he conducted with his eyes often closed  bernstein s technique was demonstrative  with highly expressive facial gestures and hand and body movements. karajan could conduct for hours without moving his feet  while bernstein was known at times to leap into the air at a great climax. as the music director of the berlin philharmonic  karajan cultivated warm  blended beauty of tone  which has sometimes been criticized as too uniformly applied  by contrast  in bernstein s only appearance with the berlin philharmonic in 1979 – performing mahler s symphony no. 9 – he tried to get the orchestra to produce an  ugly  tone in a certain passage in which he believed it suited the expressive meaning of the music (the first horn player refused  and finally agreed to let an understudy play instead of himself). both karajan and bernstein made extensive use of advances in media to convey their art  but in tellingly different ways. bernstein hosted major prime-time national television series to educate and reach out to children and the public at large about classical music  karajan made a series of films late in his life  but in them  he did not talk. both made numerous recordings  but their attitudes toward recording differed  karajan frequently made new studio recordings to take advantage of advances in recording technique  which fascinated him – he played a role in setting the specifications of the compact disc – but bernstein  in his post-new york days  came to insist on (for the most part) live concert recordings  believing that music-making did not come to life in a studio without an audience. in the last third of the 20th century  conducting technique – particularly with the right hand and the baton – became increasingly standardized. conductors like willem mengelberg in amsterdam until the end of world war ii had had extensive rehearsal time to mold orchestras very precisely  and thus could have idiosyncratic techniques  modern conductors  who spend less time with any given orchestra  must get results with much less rehearsal time. a more standardized technique allows communication to be much more rapid. nonetheless  conductors  techniques still show a great deal of variety  particularly with the use of the left hand  facial and eye expression  and body language.   === 21st century ===  women conductors were almost unheard of in the ranks of leading orchestral conductors through most of the 19th and 20th centuries  but today  artists like hortense von gelmini  marin alsop and simone young are to be seen conducting leading orchestras. alsop was appointed music director of the baltimore symphony orchestra in 2007 – the first woman ever appointed to head a major us orchestra – and also of the orquestra sinfônica do estado de são paulo in 2012  and alsop
was the first woman to conduct on the last night of the proms. young scored similar firsts when she became head of the hamburg state opera and philharmoniker hamburg in 2005  she is also the first woman conductor to record the ring cycle of richard wagner. the guardian called conducting  one of the last glass ceilings in the music industry . a 2013 article stated that in france  out of 574 concerts only 17 were conducted by women and no women conducted at the national opéra in paris.  bachtrack reported that  in a list of the world s 150 top conductors that year  only five were women. while mexico has produced several major international conductors  alondra de la parra has become the first mexican-born woman to attain distinction in the profession. similarly  conductors of east asian descent have become more prominent within the contemporary orchestral landscape–notably  seiji ozawa  who was thematic director of the boston symphony orchestra from 1973 until 2002 after holding similar posts in san francisco and toronto  and myung-whun chung  who has held major posts in germany and france and now is bringing the seoul philharmonic orchestra to international attention. there is still a lack of representation of black artists in the conducting profession  but there have been notable exceptions  such as henry lewis  dean dixon  james depreist  paul freeman  and michael morgan. for more information on black conductors  see black conductors. according to a 2004 article in the guardian   black conductors are rare in the classical music world and even in symphony orchestras it is unusual to see more than one or two black musicians.    == technique ==  conducting is a means of communicating artistic directions to performers during a performance. although there are many formal rules on how to conduct correctly  others are subjective  and a wide variety of different conducting styles exist depending upon the training and sophistication of the conductor. the primary responsibilities of the conductor are to unify performers  set the tempo  execute clear preparations and beats  listen critically and shape the sound of the ensemble  and to control the interpretation and pacing of the music. communication is non-verbal during a performance  however in rehearsal frequent interruptions allow directions as to how the music should be played. during rehearsals  the conductor may stop the playing of a piece to request changes in the phrasing or request a change in the timbre of a certain section. in amateur orchestras  the rehearsals are often stopped to draw the musicians  attentions to performance errors or transposition mistakes. conducting requires an understanding of the elements of musical expression (tempo  dynamics  articulation) and the ability to communicate them effectively to an ensemble. the ability to communicate nuances of phrasing and expression through gestures is also beneficial. conducting gestures are preferably prepared beforehand by the conductor while studying the score  but may
sometimes be spontaneous. a distinction is sometimes made between orchestral conducting and choral conducting. typically  orchestral conductors use a baton more often than choral conductors. the grip of the baton varies from conductor to conductor.   === beat and tempo === at the beginning of a piece of music  the conductor raises his hands (or hand if he only uses a single hand) to indicate that the piece is about to begin. this is a signal for the orchestra members to ready their instruments to be played or for the choristers to be ready and watching. the conductor then looks at the different sections of the orchestra (winds  strings  etc.) or choir to ensure that all the orchestra members are ready to play and choir members are ready. in some choral works  the conductor may signal to a pianist or organist to play a note or chord so that the choir members can determine their starting notes. then the conductor gives one or more preparatory beats to commence the music. the preparatory beat before the orchestra or choir begins is the upbeat. the beat of the music is typically indicated with the conductor s right hand  with or without a baton. the hand traces a shape in the air in every bar (measure) depending on the time signature  indicating each beat with a change from downward to upward motion. the images show the most common beat patterns  as seen from the conductor s point of view.the downbeat indicates the first beat of the bar  and the upbeat indicates the beat before the first note of the piece and the last beat of the bar. the instant at which the beat occurs is called the ictus (plural  ictūs or ictuses)  and is usually indicated by a sudden (though not necessarily large) click of the wrist or change in baton direction. in some instances   ictus  is also used to refer to a horizontal plane in which all the ictuses are physically located  such as the top of a music stand where a baton is tapped at each ictus. the gesture leading up to the ictus is called the  preparation  and the continuous flow of steady beats is called the  takt  (the german word for bar  measure and beat). if the tempo is slow or slowing  or if the time signature is compound  a conductor will sometimes indicate  subdivisions  of the beats. the conductor can do this by adding a smaller movement in the same direction as the movement for the beat that it belongs to. changes to the tempo are indicated by changing the speed of the beat. to carry out and to control a rallentando (slowing down the pace of the music)  a conductor may introduce beat subdivisions. while some conductors use both hands to indicate the beat  with the left hand mirroring the right  formal education discourages such an approach. the second hand can
be used for cueing the entrances of individual players or sections  and to aid indications of dynamics  phrasing  expression  and other elements. during an instrumental solo section (or  in an opera orchestra during a vocalist s unaccompanied solo)  some conductors stop counting out all the subdivisions and simply tap the baton down once per bar  to aid performers who are counting bars of rests. there is a difference between the  textbook  definition of where the ictus of a downbeat occurs and the actual performance practice in professional orchestras. with an abrupt  loud sforzando chord  a professional orchestra will often play slightly after the striking of the ictus point of the baton stroke.   === dynamics === dynamics are indicated in various ways. the dynamic may be communicated by the size of the conducting movements  larger shapes representing louder sounds. changes in dynamic may be signalled with the hand that is not being used to indicate the beat  an upward motion (usually palm-up) indicates a crescendo  a downward motion (usually palm-down) indicates a diminuendo. changing the size of conducting movements frequently results in changes in the character of the music depending upon the circumstances. dynamics can be fine-tuned using various gestures  showing one s palm to the performers or leaning away from them may demonstrate a decrease in volume. to adjust the overall balance of the various instruments or voices  these signals can be combined or directed toward a particular section or performer.   === cueing === the indication of entries  when a performer or section should begin playing (perhaps after a long period of rests)  is called  cueing . a cue must forecast with certainty the exact moment of the coming ictus  so that all the players or singers affected by the cue can begin playing simultaneously. cueing is most important for cases where a performer or section has not been playing for a lengthy time. cueing is also helpful in the case of a pedal point with string players  when a section has been playing the pedal point for a lengthy period  a cue is important to indicate when they should change to a new note. cueing is achieved by  engaging  the players before their entry (by looking at them) and executing a clear preparation gesture  often directed toward the specific players. an inhalation  which may or may not be a semi-audible  sniff  from the conductor  is a common element in the cueing technique of some conductors. mere eye contact or a look in the general direction of the players may be sufficient in many instances  as when more than one section of the ensemble enters at the same time. larger musical events may warrant the use of a larger or more emphatic cue designed to encourage emotion and energy.   === other musical elements ===  articulation may be indicated by the character of the ictus 
ranging from short and sharp for staccato  to long and fluid for legato. many conductors change the tension of the hands  strained muscles and rigid movements may correspond to marcato  while relaxed hands and soft movements may correspond to legato or espressivo. phrasing may be indicated by wide overhead arcs or by a smooth hand motion either forwards or side-to-side. a held note is often indicated by a hand held flat with palm up. the end of a note  called a  cutoff  or  release  may be indicated by a circular motion  the closing of the palm  or the pinching of finger and thumb. a release is usually preceded by a preparation and concluded with a complete stillness. conductors aim to maintain eye contact with the ensemble as much as possible  encouraging eye contact in return and increasing the dialogue between players/singers and conductor. facial expressions may also be important to demonstrate the character of the music or to encourage the players. in some cases  such as where there has been little rehearsal time to prepare a piece  a conductor may discreetly indicate how the bars of music will be beat immediately before the start of the movement by holding up their fingers in front of their chest (so only the performers can see). for example  in a 44 piece that the conductor will beat  in two  (two ictus points or beats per bar  as if it were 22)  the conductor would hold up two fingers in front of his chest. in most cases  there is a short pause between movements of a symphony  concerto or dance suite. this brief pause gives orchestra or choir members time to turn the pages of their part and ready themselves for the start of the next movement. string players may apply rosin or wipe sweat off their hands with a handkerchief. reed players may take this time to change to a new reed. in some cases  woodwind or brass players will use the pause to switch to a different instrument (e.g.  from trumpet to cornet or from clarinet to e♭ clarinet). if the conductor wishes to immediately begin one movement after another for musical reasons  this is called attacca. the conductor will instruct the orchestra members and choristers to write the term in their parts  so that they will be ready to go immediately to the next movement.   == roles ==  the roles of a conductor vary a great deal between different conducting positions and different ensembles. in some cases  a conductor will also be the musical director of the symphony  choosing the program for the entire season  including concerts by guest conductors  concerto soloists  pop concerts  and so on. a senior conductor may attend some or all of the auditions for new members of the orchestra  to ensure that the candidates have the playing style and tone that the conductor prefers
and that candidates meet the highest performance standards. some choral conductors are hired to prepare a choir for several weeks which will subsequently be directed by another conductor. the choral conductor is usually acknowledged for their preparatory work in the concert program. some conductors may have a significant public relations role  giving interviews to the local news channel and appearing on television talk shows to promote the upcoming season or particular concerts. on the other hand  a conductor hired to guest conduct a single concert may only have the responsibility of rehearsing the orchestra for several pieces and conducting one or two concerts. while a handful of conductors have become well-known celebrities  such as leonard bernstein  most are only known within the classical music scene.   == training and education ==  classical choral and instrumental conducting have established comprehensive systems of instruction and training. aspiring conductors can study at colleges  conservatories  and universities. conservatories  which are the standard musical training system in france and in quebec (canada) provide lessons and amateur conducting experience. universities offer a range of conducting programs  including courses in conducting as part of bachelor s degrees  a small number of master of music degrees in conducting  and an even smaller number of doctor of musical arts degrees in conducting. in addition  there are a variety of other training programs such as classical summer camps and training festivals  which give students the opportunity to conduct a wide range of music. aspiring conductors need to obtain a broad education about the history of music  including the major periods of classical music and regarding music theory. many conductors learn to play a keyboard instrument such as the piano or the pipe organ  a skill that helps them to be able to analyze symphonies and try out their interpretations before they have access to an orchestra to conduct. many conductors get experience playing in an orchestra or singing in a choir  an experience which gives them good insights into how orchestras and choirs are conducted and rehearsed. in 2014  orchestra conductors typically hold a master s degree in music and choir conductors in the us typically hold a bachelor s degree in music. bachelor s degrees (referred to as b.mus. or b.m) are four-year programs that include conducting lessons  amateur orchestra experience  and a sequence of courses in music history  music theory  and liberal arts courses (e.g.  english literature)  which give the student a more well-rounded education. students do not usually specialize in conducting at the b.mus. stage  instead  they usually develop general music skills such as singing  playing an orchestral instrument  performing in a choir  playing in orchestra  and playing a keyboard instrument such as the piano or the organ. another topic that conducting students study is the languages used in classical music opera. orchestral conductors are expected to be able to rehearse and lead choirs in works for orchestra and
choir. as such  orchestral conductors need to know the major languages used in choral writing (including french  italian and latin  among others) and they must understand the correct diction of these languages in a choral singing context. the opposite is also true  a choral conductor will be expected to rehearse and lead a string orchestra or full orchestra when performing works for choir and orchestra. as such  a choral conductor needs to know how to rehearse and lead instrument sections. master of music degrees (m.mus.) in conducting consist of private conducting lessons  ensemble experience  coaching  and graduate courses in music history and music theory  along with one or two conducted concerts. a master s degree in music (referred to as an m.mus. or m.m.) is often the required minimum credential for people who wish to become a professor of conducting. doctor of musical arts (referred to as d.m.a.  dma  d.mus.a. or a.mus.d) degrees in conducting provide an opportunity for advanced study at the highest artistic and pedagogical level  requiring usually an additional 54+ credit hours beyond a master s degree (which is about 30+ credits beyond a bachelor s degree). for this reason  admission is highly selective. examinations in music history  music theory  ear training/dictation  and an entrance examination and conducting audition are required. students perform a number of conducted concerts  including a combination lecture-conducted concert with an accompanying doctoral dissertation  advanced coursework. students must typically maintain a minimum b average. a dma in conducting is a terminal degree  and as such  it qualifies the holder to teach in colleges  universities and conservatories. in addition to academic study  another part of the training pathway for many conductors is conducting amateur orchestras  such as youth orchestras  school orchestras and community orchestras. a small number of conductors become professionals without formal training in conducting. these individuals often have achieved renown as instrumental or vocal performers  and they have often undertaken a great deal of training in their area of expertise (instrumental performance or singing). another way that a small number of conductors become professionals without formal training in conducting is by learning on the job by conducting amateur orchestras  school orchestras  and community orchestras (or the equivalent choral ensembles). the average salary of conductors in the us in 2014 was $48 180. a 3% growth rate is forecast for conducting jobs from 2014 to 2024  a slower than average growth rate.   == see also == conductorless orchestra list of principal conductors by orchestra   == references ==   == further reading == michael bowles  the art of conducting (garden city  new york  doubleday  1959)  english edition as the conductor  his artistry and craftsmanship (london  g. bell & sons  1961). larry g. curtis and david l. kuehn  a guide to successful instrumental conducting (new york  mcgraw-hill  1992)  isbn 978-0697126948. michel faul
 louis jullien  musique  spectacle et folie au xixe siècle (biarritz  atlantica  2006)  isbn 9782351650387. elliott w. galkin  a history of orchestral conducting in theory and practice (new york  pendragon press  1988)  isbn 978-0918728470. norman lebrecht  the maestro myth  great conductors in pursuit of power (2nd revised and updated edition  new york  citadel press  2001). brock mcelheran  conducting technique for beginners and professionals (new york  oxford university press  1989)  isbn 978-0193858305. ilya musin  the technique of conducting (техника дирижирования) (moscow  muzyka publishing house  1967). ennio nicotra  introduction to the orchestral conducting technique in accordance with the orchestral conducting school of ilya musin  book and dvd in english  german  italian  spanish (milan  edizioni curci  2007). frederik prausnitz  score and podium (new york  w.w. norton  1983)  isbn 978-0393951547. max rudolf  the grammar of conducting (new york  macmillan  2nd ed. 1981)  isbn 978-0028722207. palmer  fiona m. (17 march 2017). conductors in britain  1870–1914  wielding the baton at the height of empire. woodbridge  boydell press. p. 320. isbn 9781783271450.   == external links ==  media related to conducting at wikimedia commons the new york times video  including motion capture of alan gilbert  as he demonstrates and discusses the role of a conductor  rehearsing stravinsky s soldier s tale.
a mechanic is an artisan  skilled tradesperson  or technician who uses tools to build  maintain  or repair machinery.   == duties == most mechanics specialize in a particular field  such as air conditioning and refrigeration mechanics  auto mechanics  bicycle mechanics  boiler mechanics  general mechanics  industrial maintenance mechanics (millwrights)  motorcycle mechanics  aircraft mechanics  heavy duty equipment mechanics  bus mechanics  truck mechanics  diesel mechanics as well as tank mechanics in the armed services.  a mechanic is typically certified by a trade association or regional government power. mechanics may be separated into two classes based on the type of machines they work on  heavyweight and lightweight. heavyweight work is on larger machines or heavy equipment  such as tractors and trailers  while lightweight work is on smaller items  such as automotive engines.   == auto mechanics == auto mechanics have many trades within. some may specialize in the electrical aspects  while others may specialize in the mechanical aspects. other areas include  brakes and steering  suspension  automatic or manual transmission  engine repairs or diagnosing customer complaints.  an automotive technician  on the other hand  has a wide variety of topics to learn.    == references ==
a consultant (from latin  consultare  to deliberate ) is a professional who provides expert advice in a particular area such as security (electronic or physical)  management  education  accountancy  law  regulatory compliance  human resources  marketing (and public relations)  finance  health care  engineering  science or any of many other specialized fields. a consultant is usually an expert or an experienced professional in a specific field and has a wide knowledge of the subject matter. the role of consultant outside the medical sphere (where the term is used specifically for a grade of doctor) can fall under one of two general categories   internal consultant  someone who operates within an organization but is available to be consulted on areas of their specialization by other departments or individuals (acting as clients)  or external consultant  someone who is employed externally to the client (either by a consulting firm or some other agency) whose expertise is provided on a temporary basis  usually for a fee. consulting firms range in size from sole proprietorships consisting of a single consultant  small businesses consisting of a small number of consultants  to mid- to large consulting firms  which in some cases are multinational corporations. this type of consultant generally engages with multiple and changing clients  which are typically companies  non-profit organizations  or governments.by hiring a consultant  clients have access to deeper levels of expertise than would be financially feasible for them to retain in-house on a long-term basis. moreover  clients can control their expenditures on consulting services by only purchasing as much services from the outside consultant as desired. consultants provide their advice to their clients in a variety of forms. reports and presentations are often used. however  in some specialized fields  the consultant may develop customized software or other products for the client. depending on the nature of the consulting services and the wishes of the client  the advice from the consultant may be made public  by placing the report or presentation online  or the advice may be kept confidential  and only given to the senior executives of the organization paying for the consulting services.   == ways of work == the range of areas of expertise covered by the term  consultant  is wide.  one of the more common types is the management consultant. consulting and the means by which the (external) consultant is engaged vary according to industry and local practice.  however the principal difference between a consultant and a temp is generally one of direction.  a consultant or temp is engaged to fulfill a brief in terms of helping to find solutions to specific issues but the ways in which that is to be done generally falls to the consultant to decide. an information systems or project management consultant is also referred as just a consultant who manages constraints such as budget and resources agreed with the client.  an external
consultant  on the other hand is normally fulfilling a non-employee role that usually exists within the organization and is helping to bridge a gap caused by staffing shortages  skills and expertise.  they are directed by the normal management structure of the organization. there is  however  a hybrid form where a consultant may be hired as an interim manager or executive  bringing a combination of specialist expertise to bear on a role that is temporarily vacant (usually at a senior level). a second difference is that temp is generally used for labor-oriented work whereas an external consultant is generally used for service-oriented work. consultants and temps are those that work for clients. both of them are non-employees of an organization and both work on the basis of contract terms. some companies have employees of the company act as internal consultants and they provide cross-team advice. in most cases  however  employees of a company titled as consultants are those that work with the clients of that company and are external to the client. a manager at the client company  to whom the consultant or temp reports  does not have direct authority or responsibility over the outcome of the consultant s work because they are external and are providing a service to that company. as long they are external to the company/team they are consultants  but as soon as they join the company/team they become employees/team members and are given job titles based on their skills. some consultants are employed indirectly by the client via a consultancy staffing company  a company that provides consultants on an agency basis.  the staffing company itself does not usually have consulting expertise but works rather like an employment agency. this form of working is particularly common in the ict sector.  such consultants are often called  contractors  since they are usually providing technical services (such as programming or systems analysis) that could be performed in-house were it not easier for the employer to operate a flexible system of only hiring such technologists at times of peak workload rather than permanently. while many consultants work for firms  there is also an increasing number of independent consultants. many of these professionals also join networks or alliances that allow them to find collaborators and new clients.   == common types == in the business  and as of recently the private sphere  the most commonly found consultants are   3d consultants who are specialists in the field of 3d scanning  printing  modeling  designing  engineering  building  and everything that has to do with the three dimensions. business transformation consultants are specialists in assisting business stakeholders to align the strategy and objectives to their  business operations. this may include assisting in the identification of business change opportunities and capability gaps  defining solutions to enable required business capability (this may include technology  organisational  or process solutions) and supporting the implementation of these changes across the business.
engineering consultants provide engineering-related services such as design  supervision  execution  repair  operation  maintenance  technology  creation of drawings and specifications  and make recommendations to public  companies  firms and industries. educational consultants assist students or parents in making educational decisions and giving advice in various issues  such as tuition  fees  visas  and enrolling in higher education. human resources (hr) consultants who provide expertise around employment practice and people management. immigration consultants help with the legal procedures of immigration from one country to another. internet consultants who are specialists in business use of the internet and keep themselves up-to-date with new and changed capabilities offered by the web. ideally internet consultants also have practical experience and expertise in management skills such as strategic planning  change  projects  processes  training  team-working and customer satisfaction. information-technology (it) consultants in many disciplines such as computer hardware  software engineering  or networks. interim managers as mentioned above may be independent consultants who act as interim executives with decision-making power under corporate policies or statutes. they may sit on specially constituted boards or committees. marketing consultants who are generally called upon to advise around areas of product development and related marketing matters including marketing strategy. process consultants who are specialists in the design or improvement of operational processes and can be specific to the industry or sector. public-relations (pr) consultants deal specifically with public relations matters external to a client organization and are often engaged on a semi-permanent basis by larger organizations to provide input and guidance. performance consultants who focus on the execution of an initiative or overall performance of their client. property consultant  advises property investors  buyers or sellers about pros and cons while investing in a property. sales consultants who focus on all levels of sales and marketing for the improvement of sales roi and moving share from competition. strategy consultants (also known as management consultants) working on the development of and improvement to organizational strategy alongside senior management in many industries.a more comprehensive list of types is shown below.   == places of work == though most of the back-office research and analysis occurs at the consultants  offices or home-offices  in the case of smaller consulting firms  consultants typically work at the site of the client for at least some of the time. by spending time at the client s organization  the consultant is able to observe work processes  interview workers  managers  executives  board members  or other individuals  and study how the organization operates. the governing factor on where a consultant works tends to be the amount of interaction required with other employees of the client. if a management consultant is providing advice to a software firm that is struggling with employee morale  absenteeism and issues with managers and senior engineers leaving the firm  the consultant will probably spend a good deal of time at the client s office  interviewing staff
 engineers  managers and executives  and observing work processes. on the other hand  a legal consultant asked to provide advice on a specific property law issue might only have a few meetings at the client s office  and conduct the majority of his work at the consultant s office and in legal libraries. similarly  the growth of online  highly skilled consultant marketplaces has begun to grow. these online platforms provide consultants with experience working for typical consulting firms to easily transition into freelancing. this means that many consultants have become much more flexible in where they can work and the nature of their work.   == qualifications == there is no single qualification to becoming a consultant  other than those laid down in relation to medical  psychological and engineering personnel who have attained this level-degree in it or professional licenses. consultants may hold undergraduate degrees  graduate degrees  professional degrees or professional designations pertaining to their field(s) of expertise. in some fields  a consultant may be required to hold certain professional licenses (e.g.  a civil engineer providing consulting on a bridge project may have to be a professional engineer). in other types of consulting  there may be no specific qualification requirements. a legal consultant may have to be a member of the bar or hold a law degree. an accounting consultant may have to have an accounting designation  such as chartered accountant status. on the other hand  some individuals become consultants after a lengthy and distinguished career as an executive or political leader  so their management or government experience may be their main  credential  rather than a degree or professional designation. consultant peter block defines a consultant as  someone who has influence over an individual  group  or organization  but who has no direct authority to implement changes.  he contrasts this with a surrogate manager who is a person who  acts on behalf of  or in place of  a manager.  the key difference is that a consultant never makes decisions for the individual or group  whereas a surrogate manager does make decisions. accredited associates are bound by a code of ethics that require the consultant to only provide “practical advice that works”—“analysing as a generalist and solving as a specialist”—by using the skills and experience of a sub-contracted fellow associate  thus at all times providing the client with the best available advice and support. internationally the accreditation of management consultants is overseen by higher education training and accreditation organizations.  the international council of management consulting institutes (icmci) was founded in 1987 and has around 50 member institutes covering the globe. the award of certified management consultant (cmc) status is its internationally recognised accreditation (in some countries like the us  conforms to iso/iec 17024 2003 standards) that is not specific to the technical content of the consultant s practice.  for instance  this could be held equally by a human resources (hr)
expert or a chemical engineer operating as management consultants in their field(s) of expertise. there are about 10 000 cmcs worldwide. international federation of consulting engineers (fidic) is a federation whose members are national associations of consulting engineers.for management consultancy services  the iso 20700 standard has been available since 2017.   == types ==   == see also == adviser biotechnology consulting contingent workforce economic consulting interim management irs reclassification management consulting permatemp political consulting public consultation tax advisor umbrella company iso 20700   == references ==
an artist is a person engaged in an activity related to creating art  practicing the arts  or demonstrating an art. the common usage in both everyday speech and academic discourse is a practitioner in the visual arts only. the term is often used in the entertainment business  especially in a business context  for musicians and other performers (less often for actors).  artiste  (the french for artist) is a variant used in english only in this context  this use is becoming rare. use of the term to describe writers  for example  is valid  but less common  and mostly restricted to contexts like criticism.   == dictionary definitions == the oxford english dictionary defines the older broad meanings of the term  artist   a learned person or master of arts one who pursues a practical science  traditionally medicine  astrology  alchemy  chemistry a follower of a pursuit in which skill comes by study or practice a follower of a manual art  such as a mechanic one who makes their craft a fine art one who cultivates one of the fine arts – traditionally the arts presided over by the muses   == history of the term == the greek word  techně  often translated as  art  implies mastery of any sort of craft. the adjectival latin form of the word   technicus  became the source of the english words technique  technology  technical. in greek culture each of the nine muses oversaw a different field of human creation   calliope (the  beautiful of speech )  chief of the muses and muse of epic or heroic poetry clio (the  glorious one )  muse of history erato (the  amorous one )  muse of love or erotic poetry  lyrics  and marriage songs euterpe (the  well-pleasing )  muse of music and lyric poetry melpomene (the  chanting one )  muse of tragedy polyhymnia or polymnia (the  [singer] of many hymns )  muse of sacred song  oratory  lyric  singing  and rhetoric terpsichore (the  [one who] delights in dance )  muse of choral song and dance thalia (the  blossoming one )  muse of comedy and bucolic poetry urania (the  celestial one )  muse of astronomyno muse was identified with the visual arts of painting and sculpture. in ancient greece sculptors and painters were held in low regard  somewhere between freemen and slaves  their work regarded as mere manual labour.the word art derives from the latin  ars  (stem art-)  which  although literally defined means  skill method  or  technique  also conveys a connotation of beauty. during the middle ages the word artist already existed in some countries such as italy  but the meaning was something resembling craftsman  while the word artesan was still unknown. an artist was someone able to do
a work better than others  so the skilled excellency was underlined  rather than the activity field. in this period some  artisanal  products (such as textiles) were much more precious and expensive than paintings or sculptures. the first division into major and minor arts dates back at least to the works of leon battista alberti (1404–1472)  de re aedificatoria  de statua  de pictura  which focused on the importance of the intellectual skills of the artist rather than the manual skills (even if in other forms of art there was a project behind).with the academies in europe (second half of 16th century) the gap between fine and applied arts was definitely set. many contemporary definitions of  artist  and  art  are highly contingent on culture  resisting aesthetic prescription  in much the same way that the features constituting beauty and the beautiful cannot be standardized easily without corruption into kitsch.   == the present day concept of an  artist  == artist is a descriptive term applied to a person who engages in an activity deemed to be an art. an artist also may be defined unofficially as  a person who expresses him- or herself through a medium . the word is also used in a qualitative sense of  a person creative in  innovative in  or adept at  an artistic practice. most often  the term describes those who create within a context of the fine arts or  high culture  activities such as drawing  painting  sculpture  acting  dancing  writing  filmmaking  new media  photography  and music—people who use imagination  talent  or skill to create works that may be judged to have an aesthetic value. art historians and critics define artists as those who produce art within a recognized or recognizable discipline. contrasting terms for highly skilled workers in media in the applied arts or decorative arts include artisan  craftsman  and specialized terms such as potter  goldsmith or glassblower. fine arts artists such as painters succeeded in the renaissance in raising their status  formerly similar to these workers  to a decisively higher level. the term may also be used loosely or metaphorically to denote highly skilled people in any non- art  activities  as well— law  medicine  mechanics  or mathematics  for example. often  discussions on the subject focus on the differences among  artist  and  technician   entertainer  and  artisan   fine art  and  applied art  or what constitutes art and what does not. the french word artiste (which in french  simply means  artist ) has been imported into the english language where it means a performer (frequently in music hall or vaudeville). use of the word  artiste  can also be a pejorative term.the english word  artiste  has thus a narrower range of meaning than the word 
artiste  in french. in living with art  mark getlein proposes six activities  services or functions of contemporary artists  create places for some human purpose. create extraordinary versions of ordinary objects. record and commemorate. give tangible form to the unknown. give tangible form to feelings. refresh our vision and help see the world in new ways.after looking at years of data on arts school graduates as well as policies & program outcomes regarding artists  arts  & culture  elizabeth lingo and steven tepper propose the divide between  arts for art s sake  artists and commercially successful artists is not as wide as may be perceived  and that  this bifurcation between the commercial and the noncommercial  the excellent and the base  the elite and the popular  is increasingly breaking down  (eikhof & haunschild  2007). lingo and tepper point out  arts consumers don t restrict themselves to either  high  or  common  arts  instead  they demonstrate  omnivorous tastes  liking both reggae and rachmaninoff  (peterson & kern  1996  walker & scott-melnyk  2002) data indicates  artists are willing to move across sectors and no longer see working outside the commercial sector as a badge of distinction or authenticity  (bridgstock  2013  ellmeier  2003) academic  policy  and government leaders are adapting—widening—programs & opportunities in recognition of  the role of artists as drivers of economic growth and innovation  (bohm & land  2009  dcms  2006  2008  florida  2012  hesmondhalgh & baker  2010  lloyd  2010  iyengar  2013). arts graduates name  business and management skills  as the  number one area [they] wish they had been more exposed to in college  (strategic national arts alumni project [snaap]  2011  tepper & kuh  2010).   == training and employment == the us bureau of labor statistics classifies many visual artists as either craft artists or fine artists.  a craft artist makes handmade functional works of art  such as pottery or clothing.  a fine artist makes paintings  illustrations (such as book illustrations or medical illustrations)  sculptures  or similar artistic works primarily for their aesthetic value. the main source of skill for both craft artists and fine artists is long-term repetition and practice.  many fine artists have studied their art form at university and some have a master s degree in fine arts.  artists may also study on their own or receive on-the-job training from an experienced artist. the number of available jobs as an artist is increasing more slowly than other fields.  about half of us artists are self-employed.  others work in a variety of industries.  for example  a pottery manufacturer will employ craft artists  and book publishers will hire illustrators. in the us  fine artists have a median income of approximately us$50 000 per year 
and craft artists have a median income of approximately us$33 000 per year.  this compares to us$61 000 for all art-related fields  including related jobs such as graphic designers  multimedia artists  animators  and fashion designers.  many artists work part-time as artists and hold a second job.   == examples of art and artists ==   == see also ==   == notes ==   == references ==  p.galloni  il sacro artefice. mitologie degli artigiani medievali  laterza  bari  1998 c. t. onions (1991). the shorter oxford english dictionary. clarendon press oxford. isbn 0-19-861126-9   == external links ==  the artist on in our time at the bbc
management (or managing) is the administration of an organization  whether it is a business  a not-for-profit organization  or government body. management includes the activities of setting the strategy of an organization and coordinating the efforts of its employees (or of volunteers) to accomplish its  objectives through the application of available resources  such as financial  natural  technological  and human resources. the term  management  may also refer to those people who manage an organization - individually  managers.  social scientists study management as an academic discipline  investigating areas such as social organization and organizational leadership. some people study management at colleges or universities  major degrees in management include the bachelor of commerce (b.com.) bachelor of business administration (bba.) master of business administration (mba.) master in management (mscm or mim) and  for the public sector  the master of public administration (mpa) degree. individuals who aim to become management specialists or experts  management researchers  or professors may complete the doctor of management (dm)  the doctor of business administration (dba)  or the phd in business administration or management. there has recently been a movement for evidence-based management. larger organizations generally have three levels of managers {{cn}] which are typically organized in a hierarchical  pyramid structure   senior managers  such as members of a board of directors and a chief executive officer (ceo) or a president of an organization. they set the strategic goals of the organization and make decisions on how the overall organization will operate. senior managers are generally executive-level professionals  and provide direction to middle management  who directly or indirectly report to them. middle managers - examples of these would include branch managers  regional managers  department managers and section managers  who provide direction to front-line managers. middle managers communicate the strategic goals of senior management to the front-line managers. lower managers  such as supervisors and front-line team leaders  oversee the work of regular employees (or volunteers  in some voluntary organizations) and provide direction on their work.in smaller organizations  an individual manager may have a much wider scope. a single manager may perform several roles or even all of the roles commonly observed in a large organization.   == definitions == views on the definition and scope of management include   according to henri fayol   to manage is to forecast and to plan  to organise  to command  to co-ordinate and to control.  fredmund malik defines it as  the transformation of resources into utility.  management is included as one of the factors of production – along with machines  materials and money. ghislain deslandes defines it as “a vulnerable force  under pressure to achieve results and endowed with the triple power of constraint  imitation and imagination  operating on subjective  interpersonal  institutional and environmental levels”. peter drucker (1909–2005) saw the basic task of management as twofold  marketing and innovation. nevertheless 
innovation is also linked to marketing (product innovation is a central strategic marketing issue). peter drucker identifies marketing as a key essence for business success  but management and marketing are generally understood as two different branches of business administration knowledge.   === theoretical scope === management involves identifying the mission  objective  procedures  rules and manipulation of the human capital of an enterprise to contribute to the success of the enterprise. this implies effective communication  an enterprise environment (as opposed to a physical or mechanical mechanism) implies human motivation and implies some sort of successful progress or system outcome. as such  management is not the manipulation of a mechanism (machine or automated program)  not the herding of animals  and can occur either in a legal or in an illegal enterprise or environment. from an individual s perspective  management does not need to be seen solely from an enterprise point of view  because management is an essential function to improve one s life and relationships.  management is therefore everywhere and it has a wider range of application. based on this  management must have humans. communication and a positive endeavor are two main aspects of it either through enterprise or independent pursuit. plans  measurements  motivational psychological tools  goals  and economic measures (profit  etc.) may or may not be necessary components for there to be management. at first  one views management functionally  such as measuring quantity  adjusting plans  meeting goals. this applies even in situations where planning does not take place. from this perspective  henri fayol (1841–1925) considers management to consist of five functions   planning (forecasting) organizing commanding coordinating controllingin another way of thinking  mary parker follett (1868–1933)  allegedly defined management as  the art of getting things done through people . she described management as philosophy.critics  however  find this definition useful but far too narrow. the phrase  management is what managers do  occurs widely  suggesting the difficulty of defining management without circularity  the shifting nature of definitions and the connection of managerial practices with the existence of a managerial cadre or of a class. one habit of thought regards management as equivalent to  business administration  and thus excludes management in places outside commerce  as for example in charities and in the public sector. more broadly  every organization must  manage  its work  people  processes  technology  etc. to maximize effectiveness. nonetheless  many people refer to university departments that teach management as  business schools . some such institutions (such as the harvard business school) use that name  while others (such as the yale school of management) employ the broader term  management . english-speakers may also use the term  management  or  the management  as a collective word describing the managers of an organization  for example of a corporation. historically this use of the term often contrasted with
the term  labor  – referring to those being managed.but in the present era the concept of management is identified in the wide areas and its frontiers have been pushed to a broader range. apart from profitable organizations even non-profitable organizations (ngos) apply management concepts. the concept and its uses are not constrained. management on the whole is the process of planning  organizing  coordinating  leading and controlling.   == nature of work == in profitable organizations  management s primary function is the satisfaction of a range of stakeholders. this typically involves making a profit (for the shareholders)  creating valued products at a reasonable cost (for customers)  and providing great employment opportunities for employees. in nonprofit management  add the importance of keeping the faith of donors. in most models of management and governance  shareholders vote for the board of directors  and the board then hires senior management. some organizations have experimented with other methods (such as employee-voting models) of selecting or reviewing managers  but this is rare.   == history == some see management as a late-modern (in the sense of late modernity) conceptualization. on those terms it cannot have a pre-modern history – only harbingers (such as stewards). others  however  detect management-like thought among ancient sumerian traders and the builders of the pyramids of ancient egypt. slave-owners through the centuries faced the problems of exploiting/motivating a dependent but sometimes unenthusiastic or recalcitrant workforce  but many pre-industrial enterprises  given their small scale  did not feel compelled to face the issues of management systematically. however  innovations such as the spread of hindu numerals (5th to 15th centuries) and the codification of double-entry book-keeping (1494) provided tools for management assessment  planning and control.  an organisation is more stable if members have the right to express their differences and solve their conflicts within  it. while one person can begin an organisation   it is lasting when it is left in the care of many and when many desire to maintain it . a weak manager can follow a strong one  but not another weak one  and maintain authority. a manager seeking to change an established organization  should retain at least a shadow of the ancient customs .with the changing workplaces of industrial revolutions in the 18th and 19th centuries  military theory and practice contributed approaches to managing the newly-popular factories.given the scale of most commercial operations and the lack of mechanized record-keeping and recording before the industrial revolution  it made sense for most owners of enterprises in those times to carry out management functions by and for themselves. but with growing size and complexity of organizations  a distinction between owners (individuals  industrial dynasties or groups of shareholders) and day-to-day managers (independent specialists in planning and control) gradually became more common.   === etymology === the english verb  manage  comes from the italian maneggiare (to handle  especially tools or a horse)  which
derives from the two latin words manus (hand) and agere (to act). the french word for housekeeping  ménagerie  derived from ménager ( to keep house  compare ménage for  household )  also encompasses taking care of domestic animals. ménagerie is the french translation of xenophon s famous book oeconomicus (greek  οἰκονομικός) on household matters and husbandry. the french word mesnagement (or ménagement) influenced the semantic development of the english word management in the 17th and 18th centuries.   === early writing === management (according to some definitions) has existed for millennia  and several writers have produced background works that have contributed to modern management theories. some theorists have cited ancient military texts as providing lessons for civilian managers.  for example  chinese general sun tzu in his 6th-century bc work the art of war recommends (when re-phrased in modern terminology) being aware of and acting on strengths and weaknesses of both a manager s organization and a foe s. the writings of influential chinese legalist philosopher shen buhai may be considered to embody a rare premodern example of abstract theory of administration.various ancient and medieval civilizations produced  mirrors for princes  books  which aimed to advise new monarchs on how to govern. plato described job specialization in 350 bc  and alfarabi listed several leadership traits in ad 900. other examples include the indian arthashastra by chanakya (written around 300 bc)  and the prince by italian author niccolò machiavelli (c. 1515).  written in 1776 by adam smith  a scottish moral philosopher  the wealth of nations discussed efficient organization of work through division of labour. smith described how changes in processes could boost productivity in the manufacture of pins. while individuals could produce 200 pins per day  smith analyzed the steps involved in manufacture and  with 10 specialists  enabled production of 48 000 pins per day.   === 19th century === classical economists such as adam smith (1723–1790) and john stuart mill (1806–1873) provided a theoretical background to resource allocation  production (economics)  and pricing issues. about the same time  innovators like eli whitney (1765–1825)  james watt (1736–1819)  and matthew boulton (1728–1809) developed elements of technical production such as standardization  quality-control procedures  cost-accounting  interchangeability of parts  and work-planning. many of these aspects of management existed in the pre-1861 slave-based sector of the us economy. that environment saw 4 million people  as the contemporary usages had it   managed  in profitable quasi-mass production. salaried managers as an identifiable group first became prominent in the late 19th century.   === 20th century === by about 1900 one finds managers trying to place their theories on what they regarded as a thoroughly scientific basis (see scientism for perceived limitations of this belief). examples include henry r. towne s science of management in the 1890s  frederick winslow taylor s the principles of scientific management (1911)  lillian gilbreth s psychology of management (1914)  frank and
lillian gilbreth s applied motion study (1917)  and henry l. gantt s charts (1910s). j. duncan wrote the first college management-textbook in 1911. in 1912 yoichi ueno introduced taylorism to japan and became the first management consultant of the  japanese-management style . his son ichiro ueno pioneered japanese quality assurance. the first comprehensive theories of management appeared around 1920. the harvard business school offered the first master of business administration degree (mba) in 1921. people like henri fayol (1841–1925) and alexander church (1866–1936) described the various branches of management and their inter-relationships. in the early-20th century  people like ordway tead (1891–1973)  walter scott (1869–1955) and j. mooney applied the principles of psychology to management. other writers  such as elton mayo (1880–1949)  mary parker follett (1868–1933)  chester barnard (1886–1961)  max weber (1864–1920)  who saw what he called the  administrator  as bureaucrat  rensis likert (1903–1981)  and chris argyris (born 1923) approached the phenomenon of management from a sociological perspective. peter drucker (1909–2005) wrote one of the earliest books on applied management  concept of the corporation (published in 1946). it resulted from alfred sloan (chairman of general motors until 1956) commissioning a study of the organisation. drucker went on to write 39 books  many in the same vein. h. dodge  ronald fisher (1890–1962)  and thornton c. fry introduced statistical techniques into management-studies. in the 1940s  patrick blackett worked in the development of the applied-mathematics science of operations research  initially for military operations. operations research  sometimes known as  management science  (but distinct from taylor s scientific management)  attempts to take a scientific approach to solving decision-problems  and can apply directly to multiple management problems  particularly in the areas of logistics and operations. some of the more recent developments include the theory of constraints  management by objectives  reengineering  six sigma  the viable system model  and various information-technology-driven theories such as agile software development  as well as group-management theories such as cog s ladder. as the general recognition of managers as a class solidified during the 20th century and gave perceived practitioners of the art/science of management a certain amount of prestige  so the way opened for popularised systems of management ideas to peddle their wares. in this context many management fads may have had more to do with pop psychology than with scientific theories of management. business management includes the following branches   financial management human resource management information technology management (responsible for management information systems) marketing management operations management and production management strategic management   === 21st century === in the 21st century observers find it increasingly difficult to subdivide management into functional categories in this way. more and more processes simultaneously involve several categories. instead  one tends to think in terms of the various processes  tasks  and objects subject to management.branches of management theory also exist relating to nonprofits and to government  such as public administration 
public management  and educational management. further  management programs related to civil-society organizations have also spawned programs in nonprofit management and social entrepreneurship. note that many of the assumptions made by management have come under attack from business-ethics viewpoints  critical management studies  and anti-corporate activism. as one consequence  workplace democracy (sometimes referred to as workers  self-management) has become both more common and more advocated  in some places distributing all management functions among workers  each of whom takes on a portion of the work. however  these models predate any current political issue  and may occur more naturally than does a command hierarchy. all management embraces to some degree a democratic principle—in that in the long term  the majority of workers must support management. otherwise  they leave to find other work or go on strike. despite the move toward workplace democracy  command-and-control organization structures remain commonplace as de facto organization structures. indeed  the entrenched nature of command-and-control is evident in the way that recent layoffs have been conducted with management ranks affected far less than employees at the lower levels. in some cases  management has even rewarded itself with bonuses after laying off lower-level workers.according to leadership-academic manfred f.r. kets de vries  a contemporary senior-management team will almost inevitably have some personality disorders.   == topics ==   === basics === according to fayol  management operates through five basic functions  planning  organizing  coordinating  commanding  and controlling.  planning  deciding what needs to happen in the future and generating plans for action (deciding in advance). organizing (or staffing)  making sure the human and nonhuman resources are put into place. commanding (or leading)  determining what must be done in a situation and getting people to do it. coordinating  creating a structure through which an organization s goals can be accomplished. controlling  checking progress against plans.   === basic roles === interpersonal  roles that involve coordination and interaction with employeesfigurehead  leader  informational  roles that involve handling  sharing  and analyzing informationnerve centre  disseminator  decision  roles that require decision-makingentrepreneur  negotiator  allocator   === skills === management skills include   political  used to build a power base and to establish connections conceptual  used to analyze complex situations interpersonal  used to communicate  motivate  mentor and delegate diagnostic  ability to visualize appropriate responses to a situation leadership  ability to lead and to provide guidance to a specific group technical  expertise in one s particular functional area. behavioral  perception towards others.   === implementation of policies and strategies === all policies and strategies must be discussed with all managerial personnel and staff. managers must understand where and how they can implement their policies and strategies. a plan of action must be devised for each department. policies and strategies must be reviewed regularly. contingency plans must be devised in case the environment
changes. top-level managers should carry out regular progress assessments. the business requires team spirit and a good environment. the missions  objectives  strengths and weaknesses of each department must be analyzed to determine their roles in achieving the business s mission. the forecasting method develops a reliable picture of the business  future environment. a planning unit must be created to ensure that all plans are consistent and that policies and strategies are aimed at achieving the same mission and objectives.   == policies and strategies in the planning process == they give mid and lower-level managers a good idea of the future plans for each department in an organization. a framework is created whereby plans and decisions are made. mid and lower-level management may add their own plans to the business s strategies.   == levels == most organizations have three management levels  first-level  middle-level  and top-level managers. first-line managers are the lowest level of management and manage the work of nonmanagerial individuals who are directly involved with the production or creation of the organization s products. first-line managers are often called supervisors  but may also be called line managers  office managers  or even foremen. middle managers include all levels of management between the first-line level and the top level of the organization. these managers manage the work of first-line managers and may have titles such as department head  project leader  plant manager  or division manager. top managers are responsible for making organization-wide decisions and establishing the plans and goals that affect the entire organization. these individuals typically have titles such as executive vice president  president  managing director  chief operating officer  chief executive officer  or chairman of the board. these managers are classified in a hierarchy of authority  and perform different tasks. in many organizations  the number of managers in every level resembles a pyramid.  each level is explained below in specifications of their different responsibilities and likely job titles.   === top === the top or senior layer of management consists of the board of directors (including non-executive directors and executive directors)  president  vice-president  ceos and other members of the c-level executives. different organizations have various members in their c-suite  which may include a chief financial officer  chief technology officer  and so on. they are responsible for controlling and overseeing the operations of the entire organization. they set a  tone at the top  and develop strategic plans  company policies  and make decisions on the overall direction of the organization. in addition  top-level managers play a significant role in the mobilization of outside resources. senior managers are accountable to the shareholders  the general public and to public bodies that oversee corporations and similar organizations. some members of the senior management may serve as the public face of the organization  and they may make speeches to introduce new strategies or appear in marketing. cthe board of directors is
typically primarily composed of non-executives who owe a fiduciary duty to shareholders and are not closely involved in the day-to-day activities of the organization  although this varies depending on the type (e.g.  public versus private)  size and culture of the organization. these directors are theoretically liable for breaches of that duty and typically insured under directors and officers liability insurance. fortune 500 directors are estimated to spend 4.4 hours per week on board duties  and median compensation was $212 512 in 2010. the board sets corporate strategy  makes major decisions such as major acquisitions  and hires  evaluates  and fires the top-level manager (chief executive officer or ceo). the ceo typically hires other positions. however  board involvement in the hiring of other positions such as the chief financial officer (cfo) has increased. in 2013  a survey of over 160 ceos and directors of public and private companies found that the top weaknesses of ceos were  mentoring skills  and  board engagement  and 10% of companies never evaluated the ceo. the board may also have certain employees (e.g.  internal auditors) report to them or directly hire independent contractors  for example  the board (through the audit committee) typically selects the auditor. helpful skills of top management vary by the type of organization but typically include a broad understanding of competition  world economies  and politics. in addition  the ceo is responsible for implementing and determining (within the board s framework) the broad policies of the organization. executive management accomplishes the day-to-day details  including  instructions for preparation of department budgets  procedures  schedules  appointment of middle level executives such as department managers  coordination of departments  media and governmental relations  and shareholder communication.   === middle === consist of general managers  branch managers and department managers. they are accountable to the top management for their  department s function. they devote more time to organizational and directional functions. their roles can be emphasized as executing organizational plans in conformance with the company s policies and the objectives of the top management  they define and discuss information and policies from top management to lower management  and most importantly they inspire and provide guidance to lower level managers towards better performance. middle management is the midway management of a categorized organization  being secondary to the senior management but above the deepest levels of operational members.  an operational manager may be well-thought-out by middle management  or may be categorized as non-management operate  liable to the policy of the specific organization. efficiency of the middle level is vital in any organization  since they bridge the gap between top level and bottom level staffs. their functions include   design and implement effective group and inter-group work and information systems. define and monitor group-level performance indicators. diagnose and resolve problems within and among work groups. design and implement reward systems that support cooperative behavior. they also make decision
and share ideas with top managers.   === lower === lower managers include supervisors  section leaders  forepersons and team leaders. they focus on controlling and directing regular employees. they are usually responsible for assigning employees  tasks  guiding and supervising employees on day-to-day activities  ensuring the quality and quantity of production and/or service  making recommendations and suggestions to employees on their work  and channeling employee concerns that they cannot resolve to mid-level managers or other administrators. first-level or  front line  managers also act as role models for their employees. in some types of work  front line managers may also do some of the same tasks that employees do  at least some of the time. for example  in some restaurants  the front line managers will also serve customers during a very busy period of the day. front-line managers typically provide   training for new employees basic supervision motivation performance feedback and guidancesome front-line managers may also provide career planning for employees who aim to rise within the organization.   == training == colleges and universities around the world offer bachelor s degrees  graduate degrees  diplomas and certificates in management  generally within their colleges of business  business schools or faculty of management but also in other related departments. in the 2010s  there has been an increase in online management education and training in the form of electronic educational technology ( also called e-learning). online education has increased the accessibility of management training to people who do not live near a college or university  or who cannot afford to travel to a city where such training is available. while some professions require academic credentials in order to work in the profession (e.g.  law  medicine  engineering  which require  respectively the bachelor of law  doctor of medicine and bachelor of engineering degrees)  management and administration positions do not necessarily require the completion of academic degrees. some well-known senior executives in the us who did not complete a degree include steve jobs  bill gates and mark zuckerberg. however  many managers and executives have completed some type of business or management training  such as a bachelor of commerce or a master of business administration degree. some major organizations  including companies  not-for-profit organizations and governments  require applicants to managerial or executive positions to hold at minimum bachelor s degree in a field related to administration or management  or in the case of business jobs  a bachelor of commerce or a similar degree.   === united states of america ===   ==== undergraduate ==== at the undergraduate level  the most common business program is the bachelor of commerce (b.com.)  however  to manage technological areas  you need an undergraduate degree in a stem area as preferred to defense acquisition university guidelines.  this is typically a four-year program that includes courses that give students an overview of the role of
managers in planning and directing within an organization. course topics include accounting  financial management  statistics  marketing  strategy  and other related areas. there are many other undergraduate degrees that include the study of management  such as bachelor of arts degrees with a major in business administration or management and bachelor of public administration (b.p.a)  a degree designed for individuals aiming to work as bureaucrats in the government jobs. many colleges and universities also offer certificates and diplomas in business administration or management  which typically require one to two years of full-time study.   ==== graduate ==== at the graduate level students aiming at careers as managers or executives may choose to specialize in major subareas of management or business administration such as entrepreneurship  human resources  international business  organizational behavior  organizational theory  strategic management  accounting  corporate finance  entertainment  global management  healthcare management  investment management  sustainability and real estate. a master of business administration (mba) is the most popular professional degree at the master s level and can be obtained from many universities in the united states. mba programs provide further education in management and leadership for graduate students. other master s degrees in business and management include master of management (mm) and the master of science (m.sc.) in business administration or management  which is typically taken by students aiming to become researchers or professors. there are also specialized master s degrees in administration for individuals aiming at careers outside of business  such as the master of public administration (mpa) degree (also offered as a master of arts in public administration in some universities)  for students aiming to become managers or executives in the public service and the master of health administration  for students aiming to become managers or executives in the health care and hospital sector. management doctorates are the most advanced terminal degrees in the field of business and management. most individuals obtaining management doctorates take the programs to obtain the training in research methods  statistical analysis and writing academic papers that they will need to seek careers as researchers  senior consultants and/or professors in business administration or management. there are three main types of management doctorates  the doctor of management (d.m.)  the doctor of business administration (d.b.a.)  and the ph.d. in business administration or management. in the 2010s  doctorates in business administration and management are available with many specializations.   === good practices === while management trends can change so fast  the long term trend in management has been defined by a market embracing diversity and a rising service industry. managers are currently being trained to encourage greater equality for minorities and women in the workplace  by offering increased flexibility in working hours  better retraining  and innovative (and usually industry-specific) performance markers. managers destined for the service sector are being trained to use unique measurement techniques  better worker support and more charismatic leadership styles. human
resources finds itself increasingly working with management in a training capacity to help collect management data on the success (or failure) of management actions with employees.   ==== evidence-based management ====  evidence-based management is an emerging movement to use the current  best evidence in management and decision-making. it is part of the larger movement towards evidence-based practices. evidence-based management entails managerial decisions and organizational practices informed by the best available evidence. as with other evidence-based practice  this is based on the three principles of  1) published peer-reviewed (often in management or social science journals) research evidence that bears on whether and why a particular management practice works  2) judgement and experience from contextual management practice  to understand the organization and interpersonal dynamics in a situation and determine the risks and benefits of available actions  and 3) the preferences and values of those affected.   == see also == educational management outline of business management   == references ==   == external links == online books  and library resources in your library and in other libraries about management  media related to management at wikimedia commons  quotations related to management at wikiquote
a supervisor  or also known as foreman  boss  overseer  facilitator  monitor  area coordinator  or sometimes gaffer  is the job title of a low level management position that is primarily based on authority over a worker or charge of a workplace. a supervisor can also be one of the most senior in the staff at the place of work  such as a professor who oversees a phd dissertation.  supervision  on the other hand  can be performed by people without this formal title  for example by parents. the term supervisor itself can be used to refer to any personnel who have this task as part of their job description. an employee is a supervisor if he/she has the power and authority to do the following actions (according to the ontario ministry of labour)   give instructions and/or orders to subordinates. be held responsible for the work and actions of other employees.if an employee cannot do the above  legally  he or she is probably not a supervisor  but in some other category  such as a work group leader or lead hand. a supervisor is first and foremost an overseer whose main responsibility is to ensure that a group of subordinates get out the assigned amount of production  when they are supposed to do it and within acceptable levels of quality  costs and safety. a supervisor is responsible for the productivity and actions of a small group of employees.  the supervisor has several manager-like roles  responsibilities  and powers.  two of the key differences between a supervisor and a manager are (1) the supervisor does not typically have  hire and fire  authority  and (2) the supervisor does not have budget authority. lacking  hire and fire  authority means that a supervisor may not recruit the employees working in the supervisor s group nor does the supervisor have the authority to terminate an employee.  the supervisor may participate in the hiring process as part of interviewing and assessing candidates  but the actual hiring authority rests in the hands of a human resource manager.  the supervisor may recommend to management that a particular employee be terminated and the supervisor may be the one who documents the behaviors leading to the recommendation but the actual firing authority rests in the hands of a manager. lacking budget authority means that a supervisor is provided a budget developed by management within which constraints the supervisor is expected to provide a productive environment for the employees of the supervisor s work group.  a supervisor will usually have the authority to make purchases within specified limits.  a supervisor is also given the power to approve work hours and other payroll issues.  normally  budget affecting requests such as travel will require not only the supervisor s approval but the approval of one or more layers of management. as a member of management  a supervisor s main job is more
concerned with orchestrating and controlling work rather than performing it directly.   == role & responsibilities == supervisors are uniquely positioned through direct daily employee contact to respond to employee needs  problems  and satisfaction. supervisors are the direct link between management and the work force and can be most effective in developing job training  safety attitudes  safe working methods and identifying unsafe acts   == tasks == carry out policies passed down a hierarchy from the level above. plan short-range action-steps to carry out goals set by the level above. organize the work group. assign jobs to subordinates. delegate projects to subordinates. direct tasks  jobs and projects. train subordinates. enforce rules. lead and motivate subordinates. develop group cohesiveness. solve routine daily problems. control or evaluate performance of subordinates and the department - performance appraisals. discipline subordinates. doing  can take up to 70% of the time - (this varies according to the type of supervisory job - the doing involves the actual work of the department as well as the planning  controlling  scheduling  organizing  leading  etc.).   == training == supervisors often do not require any formal education on how they are to perform their duties but are most often given on-the-job training or attend company sponsored courses. many employers have supervisor handbooks that need to be followed. supervisors must be aware of their legal responsibilities to ensure that their employees work safely and that the workplace that they are responsible for meets government standards.   == academia == in academia  a supervisor is a senior scientist or scholar who  along with their own responsibilities  aids and guides a postdoctoral researcher  postgraduate research student or undergraduate student in their research project  offering both moral support and scientific insight and guidance. the term is used in several countries for the doctoral advisor of a graduate student.   == gaffer == in colloquial british english   gaffer  means a foreman  and is used as a synonym for  boss . in the uk  the term also commonly refers to sports coaches (football  rugby  etc.). the term is also sometimes used colloquially to refer to an old man  an elderly rustic. the word is probably a shortening of  godfather  with  ga  from association with  grandfather .  the female equivalent   gammer  came to refer colloquially to an old lady or to a gossip. the use of gaffer in this way can be seen  for example  in j.r.r. tolkien s character gaffer gamgee. in 16th century english a  gaffer  was a man who was the head of any organized group of labourers. in 16th and 17th century rural england  it was used as a title slightly inferior to  master  similar to  goodman  and was not confined to elderly men. the chorus of a famous australian shearer s song  the backblocks 
shearer (also known as widgegoeera joe)  written by w. tully at nimidgee  nsw (c.1900)  refers to a gaffer   hurrah  me boys  my shears are set  i feel both fit and well  tomorrow you’ll find me at my pen when the gaffer rings the bell. with hayden s patent thumb guards fixed and both my blades pulled back  tomorrow i go with my sardine blow for a century or the sack in glassblowing  a gaffer is the central figure in the creation of a piece of art. for example  at the corning glass works in corning  new york  a gaffer is a skilled artisan who blows through a long tube to shape molten glass into a variety of useful and/or artistic objects. a business district of corning has been named  the gaffer district  in honor of these artisans.   == first-line supervisors == i-o psychology research on first-line supervisors suggests that supervisors with the most productive work groups have the following qualities   effective supervisors are person-centered. they rate higher in the consideration function than do unsuccessful supervisors. effective supervisors are supportive. they are more helpful to employees and more willing to defend them against criticism from higher management than are less effective supervisors. effective supervisors are democratic. they hold frequent meetings with employees to solicit their views and encourage participation. less effective supervisors are more autocratic. effective supervisors are flexible. they allow employees to accomplish their goals in their own way whenever possible  consistent with the goals of the organization. less effective supervisors dictate how a job is to be performed and permit no deviation. effective supervisors describe themselves as coaches rather than directors. they emphasize quality  provide clear directions  and give timely feedback to their workers.   == see also == abusive supervision estj classification using the myers-briggs type indicator and the keirsey temperament sorter gaffer (filmmaking) position of trust power (social and political) supervision   == references ==   == further reading == schultz & schultz  duane (2010). psychology and work today. new york  prentice hall. pp. 169–170. isbn 0-205-68358-4.   == external links == perspective - leadership reminders for the overworked supervisor fbi
painting is the practice of applying paint  pigment  color or other medium to a solid surface (called the  matrix  or  support ). the medium is commonly applied to the base with a brush  but other implements  such as knives  sponges  and airbrushes  can be used.  the final work is also called a painting. painting is an important form in the visual arts  bringing in elements such as drawing  gesture (as in gestural painting)  composition  narration (as in narrative art)  or abstraction (as in abstract art). paintings can be naturalistic and representational (as in a still life or landscape painting)  photographic  abstract  narrative  symbolistic (as in symbolist art)  emotive (as in expressionism)  or political in nature (as in artivism). a portion of the history of painting in both eastern and western art is dominated by religious art. examples of this kind of painting range from artwork depicting mythological figures on pottery  to biblical scenes sistine chapel ceiling  to scenes from the life of buddha or other images of eastern religious origin. in art  the term painting describes both the act and the result of the action. the support for paintings includes such surfaces as walls  paper  canvas  wood  glass  lacquer  pottery  leaf  copper and concrete  and the painting may incorporate multiple other materials including sand  clay  paper  plaster  gold leaf  as well as objects.   == elements of painting ==   === color and tone === color  made up of hue  saturation  and value  dispersed over a surface is the essence of painting  just as pitch and rhythm are the essence of music. color is highly subjective  but has observable psychological effects  although these can differ from one culture to the next. black is associated with mourning in the west  but in the east  white is. some painters  theoreticians  writers and scientists  including goethe  kandinsky  and newton  have written their own color theory. moreover  the use of language is only an abstraction for a color equivalent. the word  red  for example  can cover a wide range of variations from the pure red of the visible spectrum of light. there is not a formalized register of different colors in the way that there is agreement on different notes in music  such as f or c♯. for a painter  color is not simply divided into basic (primary) and derived (complementary or mixed) colors (like red  blue  green  brown  etc.). painters deal practically with pigments  so  blue  for a painter can be any of the blues  phthalocyanine blue  prussian blue  indigo  cobalt blue  ultramarine  and so on. psychological and symbolical meanings of color are not  strictly speaking  means of
painting. colors only add to the potential  derived context of meanings  and because of this  the perception of a painting is highly subjective. the analogy with music is quite clear—sound in music (like a c note) is analogous to  light  in painting   shades  to dynamics  and  coloration  is to painting as the specific timbre of musical instruments is to music. these elements do not necessarily form a melody (in music) of themselves  rather  they can add different contexts to it.   === non-traditional elements === modern artists have extended the practice of painting considerably to include  as one example  collage  which began with cubism and is not painting in the strict sense. some modern painters incorporate different materials such as sand  cement  straw  leaves or wood for their texture. examples of this are the works of jean dubuffet and anselm kiefer. there is a growing community of artists who use computers to  paint  color onto a digital  canvas  using programs such as adobe photoshop  corel painter  and many others. these images can be printed onto traditional canvas if required.   === rhythm ===  jean metzinger s mosaic-like divisionist technique had its parallel in literature  a characteristic of the alliance between symbolist writers and neo-impressionist artists   i ask of divided brushwork not the objective rendering of light  but iridescences and certain aspects of color still foreign to painting. i make a kind of chromatic versification and for syllables i use strokes which  variable in quantity  cannot differ in dimension without modifying the rhythm of a pictorial phraseology destined to translate the diverse emotions aroused by nature. (jean metzinger  circa 1907)  rhythm  for artists such as piet mondrian  is important in painting as it is in music. if one defines rhythm as  a pause incorporated into a sequence  then there can be rhythm in paintings. these pauses allow creative force to intervene and add new creations—form  melody  coloration. the distribution of form  or any kind of information is of crucial importance in the given work of art  and it directly affects the aesthetic value of that work. this is because the aesthetic value is functionality dependent  i.e. the freedom (of movement) of perception is perceived as beauty. free flow of energy  in art as well as in other forms of  techne  directly contributes to the aesthetic value.music was important to the birth of abstract art  since music is abstract by nature—it does not try to represent the exterior world  but expresses in an immediate way the inner feelings of the soul. wassily kandinsky often used musical terms to identify his works  he called his most spontaneous paintings  improvisations  and described more elaborate works as  compositions . kandinsky theorized that  music is the ultimate teacher  and subsequently embarked upon
the first seven of his ten compositions. hearing tones and chords as he painted  kandinsky theorized that (for example)  yellow is the color of middle c on a brassy trumpet  black is the color of closure  and the end of things  and that combinations of colors produce vibrational frequencies  akin to chords played on a piano. in 1871 the young kandinsky learned to play the piano and cello. kandinsky s stage design for a performance of mussorgsky s pictures at an exhibition illustrates his  synaesthetic  concept of a universal correspondence of forms  colors and musical sounds.music defines much of modernist abstract painting. jackson pollock underscores that interest with his 1950 painting autumn rhythm (number 30).   == history ==  the oldest known paintings are at the grotte chauvet in france  which some historians believe are about 32 000 years old. they are engraved and painted using red ochre and black pigment  and they show horses  rhinoceros  lions  buffalo  mammoth  abstract designs and what are possibly partial human figures. however  the earliest evidence of the act of painting has been discovered in two rock-shelters in arnhem land  in northern australia. in the lowest layer of material at these sites  there are used pieces of ochre estimated to be 60 000 years old. archaeologists have also found a fragment of rock painting preserved in a limestone rock-shelter in the kimberley region of north-western australia  that is dated 40 000 years old. there are examples of cave paintings all over the world—in italy  france  spain  portugal  china  australia  mexico  etc. in western cultures  oil painting and watercolor painting have rich and complex traditions in style and subject matter. in the east  ink and color ink historically predominated the choice of media  with equally rich and complex traditions. the invention of photography had a major impact on painting. in the decades after the first photograph was produced in 1829  photographic processes improved and became more widely practiced  depriving painting of much of its historic purpose to provide an accurate record of the observable world. a series of art movements in the late 19th and early 20th centuries—notably impressionism  post-impressionism  fauvism  expressionism  cubism  and dadaism—challenged the renaissance view of the world. eastern and african painting  however  continued a long history of stylization and did not undergo an equivalent transformation at the same time.modern and contemporary art has moved away from the historic value of craft and documentation in favour of concept  leading some to say  in the 1960s  that painting as a serious art form is dead. this has not deterred the majority of living painters from continuing to practice painting either as whole or part of their work. the vitality and versatility of painting in the 21st century defies the previous  declarations  of its demise. in an epoch characterized by
the idea of pluralism  there is no consensus as to a representative style of the age. artists continue to make important works of art in a wide variety of styles and aesthetic temperaments—their merits are left to the public and the marketplace to judge.   == aesthetics and theory ==  aesthetics is the study of art and beauty  it was an important issue for 18th- and 19th-century philosophers such as kant and hegel. classical philosophers like plato and aristotle also theorized about art and painting in particular. plato disregarded painters (as well as sculptors) in his philosophical system  he maintained that painting cannot depict the truth—it is a copy of reality (a shadow of the world of ideas) and is nothing but a craft  similar to shoemaking or iron casting. by the time of leonardo  painting had become a closer representation of the truth than painting was in ancient greece. leonardo da vinci  on the contrary  said that  italian  la pittura è cosa mentale  ( english  painting is a thing of the mind ). kant distinguished between beauty and the sublime  in terms that clearly gave priority to the former. although he did not refer to painting in particular  this concept was taken up by painters such as j.m.w. turner and caspar david friedrich. hegel recognized the failure of attaining a universal concept of beauty and  in his aesthetic essay  wrote that painting is one of the three  romantic  arts  along with poetry and music  for its symbolic  highly intellectual purpose. painters who have written theoretical works on painting include kandinsky and paul klee. in his essay  kandinsky maintains that painting has a spiritual value  and he attaches primary colors to essential feelings or concepts  something that goethe and other writers had already tried to do. iconography is the study of the content of paintings  rather than their style. erwin panofsky and other art historians first seek to understand the things depicted  before looking at their meaning for the viewer at the time  and finally analyzing their wider cultural  religious  and social meaning.in 1890  the parisian painter maurice denis famously asserted   remember that a painting—before being a warhorse  a naked woman or some story or other—is essentially a flat surface covered with colors assembled in a certain order.  thus  many 20th-century developments in painting  such as cubism  were reflections on the means of painting rather than on the external world—nature—which had previously been its core subject. recent contributions to thinking about painting have been offered by the painter and writer julian bell. in his book what is painting  bell discusses the development  through history  of the notion that paintings can express feelings and ideas. in mirror of the world  bell writes   a work of art seeks to hold your attention and keep it fixed  a history of
art urges it onwards  bulldozing a highway through the homes of the imagination.   == painting media == different types of paint are usually identified by the medium that the pigment is suspended or embedded in  which determines the general working characteristics of the paint  such as viscosity  miscibility  solubility  drying time  etc.   === oil ===  oil painting is the process of painting with pigments that are bound with a medium of drying oil  such as linseed oil  which was widely used in early modern europe. often the oil was boiled with a resin such as pine resin or even frankincense  these were called  varnishes  and were prized for their body and gloss. oil paint eventually became the principal medium used for creating artworks as its advantages became widely known. the transition began with early netherlandish painting in northern europe  and by the height of the renaissance oil painting techniques had almost completely replaced tempera paints in the majority of europe.   === pastel ===  pastel is a painting medium in the form of a stick  consisting of pure powdered pigment and a binder. the pigments used in pastels are the same as those used to produce all colored art media  including oil paints  the binder is of a neutral hue and low saturation. the color effect of pastels is closer to the natural dry pigments than that of any other process. because the surface of a pastel painting is fragile and easily smudged  its preservation requires protective measures such as framing under glass  it may also be sprayed with a fixative. nonetheless  when made with permanent pigments and properly cared for  a pastel painting may endure unchanged for centuries. pastels are not susceptible  as are paintings made with a fluid medium  to the cracking and discoloration that result from changes in the color  opacity  or dimensions of the medium as it dries.   === acrylic ===  acrylic paint is fast drying paint containing pigment suspension in acrylic polymer emulsion. acrylic paints can be diluted with water  but become water-resistant when dry. depending on how much the paint is diluted (with water) or modified with acrylic gels  media  or pastes  the finished acrylic painting can resemble a watercolor or an oil painting  or have its own unique characteristics not attainable with other media. the main practical difference between most acrylics and oil paints is the inherent drying time. oils allow for more time to blend colors and apply even glazes over under-paintings. this slow drying aspect of oil can be seen as an advantage for certain techniques  but may also impede the artist s ability to work quickly.   === watercolor ===  watercolor is a painting method in which the paints are made of pigments suspended in a water-soluble vehicle. the traditional and most common support for watercolor paintings is paper 
other supports include papyrus  bark papers  plastics  vellum or leather  fabric  wood and canvas. in east asia  watercolor painting with inks is referred to as brush painting or scroll painting. in chinese  korean  and japanese painting it has been the dominant medium  often in monochrome black or browns. india  ethiopia and other countries also have long traditions. finger-painting with watercolor paints originated in china. watercolor pencils (water-soluble color pencils) may be used either wet or dry.   === ink ===  ink paintings are done with a liquid that contains pigments and/or dyes and is used to color a surface to produce an image  text  or design. ink is used for drawing with a pen  brush  or quill. ink can be a complex medium  composed of solvents  pigments  dyes  resins  lubricants  solubilizers  surfactants  particulate matter  fluorescers  and other materials. the components of inks serve many purposes  the ink’s carrier  colorants  and other additives control flow and thickness of the ink and its appearance when dry.   === hot wax or encaustic ===  encaustic painting  also known as hot wax painting  involves using heated beeswax to which colored pigments are added. the liquid/paste is then applied to a surface—usually prepared wood  though canvas and other materials are often used. the simplest encaustic mixture can be made from adding pigments to beeswax  but there are several other recipes that can be used—some containing other types of waxes  damar resin  linseed oil  or other ingredients. pure  powdered pigments can be purchased and used  though some mixtures use oil paints or other forms of pigment. metal tools and special brushes can be used to shape the paint before it cools  or heated metal tools can be used to manipulate the wax once it has cooled onto the surface. other materials can be encased or collaged into the surface  or layered  using the encaustic medium to adhere it to the surface. the technique was the normal one for ancient greek and roman panel paintings  and remained in use in the eastern orthodox icon tradition.   === fresco ===  fresco is any of several related mural painting types  done on plaster on walls or ceilings. the word fresco comes from the italian word affresco [afˈfresːko]  which derives from the latin word for fresh. frescoes were often made during the renaissance and other early time periods. buon fresco technique consists of painting in pigment mixed with water on a thin layer of wet  fresh lime mortar or plaster  for which the italian word for plaster  intonaco  is used. a secco painting  in contrast  is done on dry plaster (secco is  dry  in italian). the pigments require a binding medium  such as egg (tempera)  glue or oil to attach the pigment to the
wall.   === gouache === gouache is a water-based paint consisting of pigment and other materials designed to be used in an opaque painting method. gouache differs from watercolor in that the particles are larger  the ratio of pigment to water is much higher  and an additional  inert  white pigment such as chalk is also present. this makes gouache heavier and more opaque  with greater reflective qualities. like all watermedia  it is diluted with water.   === enamel ===  enamels are made by painting a substrate  typically metal  with powdered glass  minerals called color oxides provide coloration. after firing at a temperature of 750–850 degrees celsius (1380–1560 degrees fahrenheit)  the result is a fused lamination of glass and metal.  unlike most painted techniques  the surface can be handled and wetted  enamels have traditionally been used for decoration of precious objects  but have also been used for other purposes. limoges enamel was the leading centre of renaissance enamel painting  with small religious and mythological scenes in decorated surrounds  on plaques or objects such as salts or caskets.  in the 18th century  enamel painting enjoyed a vogue in europe  especially as a medium for portrait miniatures. in the late 20th century  the technique of porcelain enamel on metal has been used as a durable medium for outdoor murals.   === spray paint === aerosol paint (also called spray paint) is a type of paint that comes in a sealed pressurized container and is released in a fine spray mist when depressing a valve button. a form of spray painting  aerosol paint leaves a smooth  evenly coated surface. standard sized cans are portable  inexpensive and easy to store. aerosol primer can be applied directly to bare metal and many plastics. speed  portability and permanence also make aerosol paint a common graffiti medium. in the late 1970s  street graffiti writers  signatures and murals became more elaborate and a unique style developed as a factor of the aerosol medium and the speed required for illicit work. many now recognize graffiti and street art as a unique art form and specifically manufactured aerosol paints are made for the graffiti artist. a stencil protects a surface  except the specific shape to be painted. stencils can be purchased as movable letters  ordered as professionally cut logos or hand-cut by artists.   === tempera === tempera  also known as egg tempera  is a permanent  fast-drying painting medium consisting of colored pigment mixed with a water-soluble binder medium (usually a glutinous material such as egg yolk or some other size). tempera also refers to the paintings done in this medium. tempera paintings are very long lasting  and examples from the first centuries ce still exist. egg tempera was a primary method of painting until after 1500 when it was superseded by the invention of oil painting. a paint commonly called tempera (though it is not)
consisting of pigment and glue size is commonly used and referred to by some manufacturers in america as poster paint.   === water miscible oil paint === water miscible oil paints (also called  water soluble  or  water-mixable ) is a modern variety of oil paint engineered to be thinned and cleaned up with water  rather than having to use chemicals such as turpentine. it can be mixed and applied using the same techniques as traditional oil-based paint  but while still wet it can be effectively removed from brushes  palettes  and rags with ordinary soap and water. its water solubility comes from the use of an oil medium in which one end of the molecule has been altered to bind loosely to water molecules  as in a solution.   === digital painting ===  digital painting is a method of creating an art object (painting) digitally and/or a technique for making digital art in the computer. as a method of creating an art object  it adapts traditional painting medium such as acrylic paint  oils  ink  watercolor  etc. and applies the pigment to traditional carriers  such as woven canvas cloth  paper  polyester etc. by means of computer software driving industrial robotic or office machinery (printers). as a technique  it refers to a computer graphics software program that uses a virtual canvas and virtual painting box of brushes  colors and other supplies. the virtual box contains many instruments that do not exist outside the computer  and which give a digital artwork a different look and feel from an artwork that is made the traditional way. furthermore  digital painting is not  computer-generated  art as the computer does not automatically create images on the screen using some mathematical calculations. on the other hand  the artist uses his own painting technique to create the particular piece of work on the computer.   == painting styles ==  style is used in two senses  it can refer to the distinctive visual elements  techniques and methods that typify an individual artist s work. it can also refer to the movement or school that an artist is associated with. this can stem from an actual group that the artist was consciously involved with or it can be a category in which art historians have placed the painter. the word  style  in the latter sense has fallen out of favor in academic discussions about contemporary painting  though it continues to be used in popular contexts. such movements or classifications include the following    === western ===   ==== modernism ==== modernism describes both a set of cultural tendencies and an array of associated cultural movements  originally arising from wide-scale and far-reaching changes to western society in the late 19th century and early 20th century. modernism was a revolt against the conservative values of realism. the term encompasses the activities and output of those who felt the 
traditional  forms of art  architecture  literature  religious faith  social organization and daily life were becoming outdated in the new economic  social and political conditions of an emerging fully industrialized world. a salient characteristic of modernism is self-consciousness. this often led to experiments with form  and work that draws attention to the processes and materials used (and to the further tendency of abstraction).   ===== impressionism ===== the first example of modernism in painting was impressionism  a school of painting that initially focused on work done  not in studios  but outdoors (en plein air). impressionist paintings demonstrated that human beings do not see objects  but instead see light itself. the school gathered adherents despite internal divisions among its leading practitioners  and became increasingly influential. initially rejected from the most important commercial show of the time  the government-sponsored paris salon  the impressionists organized yearly group exhibitions in commercial venues during the 1870s and 1880s  timing them to coincide with the official salon. a significant event of 1863 was the salon des refusés  created by emperor napoleon iii to display all of the paintings rejected by the paris salon.   ===== abstract styles ===== abstract painting uses a visual language of form  colour and line to create a composition that may exist with a degree of independence from visual references in the world. abstract expressionism was an american post-world war ii art movement that combined the emotional intensity and self-denial of the german expressionists with the anti-figurative aesthetic of the european abstract schools—such as futurism  bauhaus and cubism  and the image of being rebellious  anarchic  highly idiosyncratic and  some feel  nihilistic.action painting  sometimes called gestural abstraction  is a style of painting in which paint is spontaneously dribbled  splashed or smeared onto the canvas  rather than being carefully applied. the resulting work often emphasizes the physical act of painting itself as an essential aspect of the finished work or concern of its artist. the style was widespread from the 1940s until the early 1960s  and is closely associated with abstract expressionism (some critics have used the terms  action painting  and  abstract expressionism  interchangeably). other modernist styles include   color field lyrical abstraction hard-edge painting pop art   ===== outsider art ===== the term outsider art was coined by art critic roger cardinal in 1972 as an english synonym for art brut (french  [aʁ bʁyt]   raw art  or  rough art )  a label created by french artist jean dubuffet to describe art created outside the boundaries of official culture  dubuffet focused particularly on art by insane-asylum inmates. outsider art has emerged as a successful art marketing category (an annual outsider art fair has taken place in new york since 1992). the term is sometimes misapplied as a catch-all marketing label for art created by people outside the mainstream  art world  regardless of
their circumstances or the content of their work.   ===== photorealism ===== photorealism is the genre of painting based on using the camera and photographs to gather information and then from this information  creating a painting that appears to be very realistic like a photograph. the term is primarily applied to paintings from the united states art movement that began in the late 1960s and early 1970s. as a full-fledged art movement  photorealism evolved from pop art and as a counter to abstract expressionism. hyperrealism is a genre of painting and sculpture resembling a high-resolution photograph. hyperrealism is a fully fledged school of art and can be considered an advancement of photorealism by the methods used to create the resulting paintings or sculptures. the term is primarily applied to an independent art movement and art style in the united states and europe that has developed since the early 2000s.   ===== surrealism ===== surrealism is a cultural movement that began in the early 1920s  and is best known for the artistic and literary production of those affiliated with the surrealist movement. surrealist artworks feature the element of surprise  the uncanny  the unconscious  unexpected juxtapositions and non sequitur  however  many surrealist artists and writers regard their work as an expression of the philosophical movement first and foremost  with the works being an artifact. leader andré breton was explicit in his assertion that surrealism was above all a revolutionary movement. surrealism developed out of the dada activities of world war i and the most important center of the movement was paris. from the 1920s onward  the movement spread around the globe  eventually affecting the visual arts  literature  film and music of many countries  as well as political thought and practice  philosophy and social theory.   === far eastern === chinese tang dynasty ming dynasty shan shui ink and wash painting hua niao southern school zhe school wu school contemporary japanese yamato-e rimpa school emakimono kanō school shijō school superflat korean   === islamic === arabic miniature mughal miniature ottoman miniature persian miniature   === indian === oriya school bengal school kangra madhubani mysore rajput mughal samikshavad tanjore warli kerala mural painting   === african === tingatinga   === contemporary art ===   == types of painting ==   === allegory === allegory is a figurative mode of representation conveying meaning other than the literal. allegory communicates its message by means of symbolic figures  actions or symbolic representation. allegory is generally treated as a figure of rhetoric  but an allegory does not have to be expressed in language  it may be addressed to the eye  and is often found in realistic painting. an example of a simple visual allegory is the image of the grim reaper. viewers understand that the image of the grim reaper is a symbolic representation of death.   === bodegón ===  in spanish art  a bodegón is a still life
painting depicting pantry items  such as victuals  game  and drink  often arranged on a simple stone slab  and also a painting with one or more figures  but significant still life elements  typically set in a kitchen or tavern. starting in the baroque period  such paintings became popular in spain in the second quarter of the 17th century. the tradition of still life painting appears to have started and was far more popular in the contemporary low countries  today belgium and netherlands (then flemish and dutch artists)  than it ever was in southern europe. northern still lifes had many subgenres  the breakfast piece was augmented by the trompe-l œil  the flower bouquet  and the vanitas. in spain there were much fewer patrons for this sort of thing  but a type of breakfast piece did become popular  featuring a few objects of food and tableware laid on a table.   === figure painting === a figure painting is a work of art in any of the painting media with the primary subject being the human figure  whether clothed or nude. figure painting may also refer to the activity of creating such a work. the human figure has been one of the contrast subjects of art since the first stone age cave paintings  and has been reinterpreted in various styles throughout history. some artists well known for figure painting are peter paul rubens  edgar degas  and édouard manet.   === illustration painting === illustration paintings are those used as illustrations in books  magazines  and theater or movie posters and comic books. today  there is a growing interest in collecting and admiring the original artwork. various museum exhibitions  magazines and art galleries have devoted space to the illustrators of the past. in the visual art world  illustrators have sometimes been considered less important in comparison with fine artists and graphic designers. but as the result of computer game and comic industry growth  illustrations are becoming valued as popular and profitable art works that can acquire a wider market than the other two  especially in korea  japan  hong kong and united states.   === landscape painting ===  landscape painting is a term that covers the depiction of natural scenery such as mountains  valleys  trees  rivers  and forests  and especially art where the main subject is a wide view  with its elements arranged into a coherent composition. in other works landscape backgrounds for figures can still form an important part of the work. sky is almost always included in the view  and weather is often an element of the composition. detailed landscapes as a distinct subject are not found in all artistic traditions  and develop when there is already a sophisticated tradition of representing other subjects. the two main traditions spring from western painting and chinese art  going back well over a thousand years in both cases.
  === portrait painting === portrait paintings are representations of a person  in which the face and its expression is predominant. the intent is to display the likeness  personality  and even the mood of the person. the art of the portrait flourished in ancient greek and especially roman sculpture  where sitters demanded individualized and realistic portraits  even unflattering ones. one of the best-known portraits in the western world is leonardo da vinci s painting titled mona lisa  which is thought to be a portrait of lisa gherardini  the wife of francesco del giocondo.   === still life ===  a still life is a work of art depicting mostly inanimate subject matter  typically commonplace objects—which may be either natural (food  flowers  plants  rocks  or shells) or man-made (drinking glasses  books  vases  jewelry  coins  pipes  and so on). with origins in the middle ages and ancient greek/roman art  still life paintings give the artist more leeway in the arrangement of design elements within a composition than do paintings of other types of subjects such as landscape or portraiture. still life paintings  particularly before 1700  often contained religious and allegorical symbolism relating to the objects depicted. some modern still life breaks the two-dimensional barrier and employs three-dimensional mixed media  and uses found objects  photography  computer graphics  as well as video and sound.   === veduta === a veduta is a highly detailed  usually large-scale painting of a cityscape or some other vista. this genre of landscape originated in flanders  where artists such as paul bril painted vedute as early as the 16th century. as the itinerary of the grand tour became somewhat standardized  vedute of familiar scenes like the roman forum or the grand canal recalled early ventures to the continent for aristocratic englishmen. in the later 19th century  more personal impressions of cityscapes replaced the desire for topographical accuracy  which was satisfied instead by painted panoramas.   == see also ==  20th-century western painting cobweb painting graphic arts painting outsourcing in china index of painting-related articles outline of painting list of most expensive paintings visual arts drawing   == notes ==   == further reading == daniel  h. (1971). encyclopedia of themes and subjects in painting  mythological  biblical  historical  literary  allegorical  and topical. new york  harry n. abrams inc. w. stanley jr. taft  james w. mayer  the science of paintings  first edition  springer  2000.
dance is a performing art form consisting of purposefully selected sequences of human movement. this movement has aesthetic and symbolic value  and is acknowledged as dance by performers and observers within a particular culture. dance can be categorized and described by its choreography  by its repertoire of movements  or by its historical period or place of origin. an important distinction is to be drawn between the contexts of theatrical and participatory dance  although these two categories are not always completely separate  both may have special functions  whether social  ceremonial  competitive  erotic  martial  or sacred/liturgical. other forms of human movement are sometimes said to have a dance-like quality  including martial arts  gymnastics  cheerleading  figure skating  synchronised swimming  marching bands  and many other forms of athletics.   == performance and participation ==  theatrical dance  also called performance or concert dance  is intended primarily as a spectacle  usually a performance upon a stage by virtuoso dancers. it often tells a story  perhaps using mime  costume and scenery  or else it may simply interpret the musical accompaniment  which is often specially composed. examples are western ballet and modern dance  classical indian dance and chinese and japanese song and dance dramas. most classical forms are centred upon dance alone  but performance dance may also appear in opera and other forms of musical theatre. participatory dance  on the other hand  whether it be a folk dance  a social dance  a group dance such as a line  circle  chain or square dance  or a partner dance such as is common in western western ballroom dancing  is undertaken primarily for a common purpose  such as social interaction or exercise  of participants rather than onlookers. such dance seldom has any narrative. a group dance and a corps de ballet  a social partner dance and a pas de deux  differ profoundly. even a solo dance may be undertaken solely for the satisfaction of the dancer. participatory dancers often all employ the same movements and steps but  for example  in the rave culture of electronic dance music  vast crowds may engage in free dance  uncoordinated with those around them. on the other hand  some cultures lay down strict rules as to the particular dances in which  for example  men  women and children may or must participate.   == origins ==  archeological evidence for early dance includes 9 000-year-old paintings in india at the rock shelters of bhimbetka  and egyptian tomb paintings depicting dancing figures  dated c. 3300 bc. it has been proposed that before the invention of written languages  dance was an important part of the oral and performance methods of passing stories down from one generation to the next. the use of dance in ecstatic trance states and healing rituals (as observed today in many contemporary  primitive
 cultures  from the brazilian rainforest to the kalahari desert) is thought to have been another early factor in the social development of dance.references to dance can be found in very early recorded history  greek dance (horos) is referred to by plato  aristotle  plutarch and lucian. the bible and talmud refer to many events related to dance  and contain over 30 different dance terms. in chinese pottery as early as the neolithic period  groups of people are depicted dancing in a line holding hands  and the earliest chinese word for  dance  is found written in the oracle bones. dance is further described in the lüshi chunqiu. primitive dance in ancient china was associated with sorcery and shamanic rituals.  during the first millennium bce in india  many texts were composed which attempted to codify aspects of daily life. bharata muni s natyashastra (literally  the text of dramaturgy ) is one of the earlier texts. it mainly deals with drama  in which dance plays an important part in indian culture. it categorizes dance into four types – secular  ritual  abstract  and  interpretive – and into four regional varieties. the text elaborates various hand-gestures (mudras) and classifies movements of the various limbs  steps and so on. a strong continuous tradition of dance has since continued in india  through to modern times  where it continues to play a role in culture  ritual  and  notably  the bollywood entertainment industry. many other contemporary dance forms can likewise be traced back to historical  traditional  ceremonial  and ethnic dance.   == dance and music ==  dance is generally  though not exclusively  performed with the accompaniment of music and may or may not be performed in time to such music. some dance (such as tap dance) may provide its own audible accompaniment in place of (or in addition to) music. many early forms of music and dance were created for each other and are frequently performed together. notable examples of traditional dance/music couplings include the jig  waltz  tango  disco  and salsa. some musical genres have a parallel dance form such as baroque music and baroque dance  other varieties of dance and music may share nomenclature but developed separately  such as classical music and classical ballet.   == dance and rhythm == rhythm and dance are deeply linked in history and practice. the american dancer ted shawn wrote   the conception of rhythm which underlies all studies of the dance is something about which we could talk forever  and still not finish.  a musical rhythm requires two main elements  first  a regularly-repeating pulse (also called the  beat  or  tactus ) that establishes the tempo and  second  a pattern of accents and rests that establishes the character of the metre or basic rhythmic pattern. the basic pulse is roughly equal in duration to a simple
step or gesture.  dances generally have a characteristic tempo and rhythmic pattern. the tango  for example  is usually danced in 24 time at approximately 66 beats per minute. the basic slow step  called a  slow  lasts for one beat  so that a full  right–left  step is equal to one 24 measure. the basic forward and backward walk of the dance is so counted –  slow-slow  – while many additional figures are counted  slow – quick-quick.just as musical rhythms are defined by a pattern of strong and weak beats  so repetitive body movements often depends on alternating  strong  and  weak  muscular movements. given this alternation of left-right  of forward-backward and rise-fall  along with the bilateral symmetry of the human body  it is natural that many dances and much music are in duple and quadruple meter. however  since some such movements require more time in one phase than the other – such as the longer time required to lift a hammer than to strike – some dance rhythms fall equally naturally into triple metre. occasionally  as in the folk dances of the balkans  dance traditions depend heavily on more complex rhythms. further  complex dances composed of a fixed sequence of steps always require phrases and melodies of a certain fixed length to accompany that sequence.  the very act of dancing  the steps themselves  generate an  initial skeleton of rhythmic beats  that must have preceded any separate musical accompaniment  while dance itself  as much as music  requires time-keeping just as utilitarian repetitive movements such as walking  hauling and digging take on  as they become refined  something of the quality of dance.musical accompaniment therefore arose in the earliest dance  so that ancient egyptians attributed the origin of the dance to the divine athotus  who was said to have observed that music accompanying religious rituals caused participants to move rhythmically and to have brought these movements into proportional measure. the same idea  that dance arises from musical rhythm  is still found in renaissance europe in the works of the dancing master guglielmo ebreo da pesaro who speaks of dance as a physical movement that arises from and expresses inward  spiritual motion agreeing with the  measures and perfect concords of harmony  that fall upon the human ear  while  earlier  mechthild of magdeburg  seizing upon dance as a symbol of the holy life foreshadowed in jesus  saying  i have piped and ye have not danced  writes   i can not dance unless thou leadest. if thou wouldst have me spring aloft  sing thou and i will spring  into love and from love to knowledge and from knowledge to ecstasy above all human sense thoinot arbeau s celebrated 16th century dance-treatise orchésographie  indeed  begins with definitions of over eighty distinct drum-rhythms.  as has been shown
above  dance has been represented through the ages as having emerged as a response to music yet  as lincoln kirstein implied  it is at least as likely that primitive music arose from dance. shawn concurs  stating that dance  was the first art of the human race  and the matrix out of which all other arts grew  and that even the  metre in our poetry today is a result of the accents necessitated by body movement  as the dancing and reciting were performed simultaneously  – an assertion somewhat supported by the common use of the term  foot  to describe the fundamental rhythmic units of poetry. scholes  not a dancer but a musician  offers support for this view  stating that the steady measures of music  of two  three or four beats to the bar  its equal and balanced phrases  regular cadences  contrasts and repetitions  may all be attributed to the  incalculable  influence of dance upon music.émile jaques-dalcroze  primarily a musician and teacher  relates how a study of the physical movements of pianists led him  to the discovery that musical sensations of a rhythmic nature call for the muscular and nervous response of the whole organism  to develop  a special training designed to regulate nervous reactions and effect a co-ordination of muscles and nerves  and ultimately to seek the connections between  the art of music and the art of dance  which he formulated into his system of eurhythmics. he concluded that  musical rhythm is only the transposition into sound of movements and dynamisms spontaneously and involuntarily expressing emotion .hence  though doubtless  as shawn asserts   it is quite possible to develop the dance without music and... music is perfectly capable of standing on its own feet without any assistance from the dance  nevertheless the  two arts will always be related and the relationship can be profitable both to the dance and to music  the precedence of one art over the other being a moot point. the common ballad measures of hymns and folk-songs takes their name from dance  as does the carol  originally a circle dance. many purely musical pieces have been named  waltz  or  minuet  for example  while many concert dances have been produced that are based upon abstract musical pieces  such as 2 and 3 part inventions  adams violin concerto and andantino. similarly  poems are often structured and named after dances or musical works  while dance and music have both drawn their conception of  measure  or  metre  from poetry. shawn quotes with approval the statement of dalcroze that  while the art of musical rhythm consists in differentiating and combining time durations  pauses and accents  according to physiological law  that of  plastic rhythm  (i.e. dance)  is to designate movement in space  to interpret
long time-values by slow movements and short ones by quick movements  regulate pauses by their divers successions and express sound accentuations in their multiple nuances by additions of bodily weight  by means of muscular innervations . shawn nevertheless points out that the system of musical time is a  man-made  artificial thing.... a manufactured tool  whereas rhythm is something that has always existed and depends on man not at all  being  the continuous flowing time which our human minds cut up into convenient units  suggesting that music might be revivified by a return to the values and the time-perception of dancing.the early-20th-century american dancer helen moller stated simply that  it is rhythm and form more than harmony and color which  from the beginning  has bound music  poetry and dancing together in a union that is indissoluble.    == approaches to dance ==   === concert dance === concert dance  like opera  generally depends for its large-scale form upon a narrative dramatic structure. the movements and gestures of the choreography are primarily intended to mime the personality and aims of the characters and their part in the plot. such theatrical requirements tend towards longer  freer movements than those usual in non-narrative dance styles. on the other hand  the ballet blanc  developed in the 19th century  allows interludes of rhythmic dance that developed into entirely  plotless  ballets in the 20th century and that allowed fast  rhythmic dance-steps such as those of the petit allegro. a well-known example is the cygnets  dance in act two of swan lake. the ballet developed out of courtly dramatic productions of 16th- and 17th-century france and italy and for some time dancers performed dances developed from those familiar from the musical suite  all of which were defined by definite rhythms closely identified with each dance. these appeared as character dances in the era of romantic nationalism. ballet reached widespread vogue in the romantic era  accompanied by a larger orchestra and grander musical conceptions that did not lend themselves easily to rhythmic clarity and by dance that emphasised dramatic mime. a broader concept of rhythm was needed  that which rudolf laban terms the  rhythm and shape  of movement that communicates character  emotion and intention  while only certain scenes required the exact synchronisation of step and music essential to other dance styles  so that  to laban  modern europeans seemed totally unable to grasp the meaning of  primitive rhythmic movements  a situation that began to change in the 20th century with such productions as igor stravinsky s the rite of spring with its new rhythmic language evoking primal feelings of a primitive past.indian classical dance styles  like ballet  are often in dramatic form  so that there is a similar complementarity between narrative expression and  pure  dance. in this case  however  the two are separately defined  though not always
separately performed. the rhythmic elements  which are abstract and technical  are known as nritta. both this and expressive dance (nritya)  though  are closely tied to the rhythmic system (tala). teachers have adapted the spoken rhythmic mnemonic system called bol to the needs of dancers. japanese classical dance-theatre styles such as kabuki and noh  like indian dance-drama  distinguish between narrative and abstract dance productions. the three main categories of kabuki are jidaimono (historical)  sewamono (domestic) and shosagoto (dance pieces). somewhat similarly  noh distinguishes between geki noh  based around the advancement of plot and the narration of action  and furyū noh  dance pieces involving acrobatics  stage properties  multiple characters and elaborate stage action.   === participatory and social dance === social dances  those intended for participation rather than for an audience  may include various forms of mime and narrative  but are typically set much more closely to the rhythmic pattern of music  so that terms like waltz and polka refer as much to musical pieces as to the dance itself. the rhythm of the dancers  feet may even form an essential part of the music  as in tap dance. african dance  for example  is rooted in fixed basic steps  but may also allow a high degree of rhythmic interpretation  the feet or the trunk mark the basic pulse while cross-rhythms are picked up by shoulders  knees  or head  with the best dancers simultaneously giving plastic expression to all the elements of the polyrhythmic pattern.   == cultural traditions ==   === africa ===  dance in africa is deeply integrated into society and major events in a community are frequently reflected in dances  dances are performed for births and funerals  weddings and wars. traditional dances impart cultural morals  including religious traditions and sexual standards  give vent to repressed emotions  such as grief  motivate community members to cooperate  whether fighting wars or grinding grain  enact spiritual rituals  and contribute to social cohesiveness.thousands of dances are performed around the continent. these may be divided into traditional  neotraditional  and classical styles  folkloric dances of a particular society  dances created more recently in imitation of traditional styles  and dances transmitted more formally in schools or private lessons. african dance has been altered by many forces  such as european missionaries and colonialist governments  who often suppressed local dance traditions as licentious or distracting. dance in contemporary african cultures still serves its traditional functions in new contexts  dance may celebrate the inauguration of a hospital  build community for rural migrants in unfamiliar cities  and be incorporated into christian church ceremonies.   === asia === all indian classical dances are to varying degrees rooted in the natyashastra and therefore share common features  for example  the mudras (hand positions)  some body positions  and the inclusion of dramatic or expressive
acting or abhinaya. indian classical music provides accompaniment and dancers of nearly all the styles wear bells around their ankles to counterpoint and complement the percussion. there are now many regional varieties of indian classical dance. dances like  odra magadhi  which after decades long debate  has been traced to present day mithila  odisha region s dance form of odissi (orissi)  indicate influence of dances in cultural interactions between different regions.the punjab area overlapping india and pakistan is the place of origin of bhangra. it is widely known both as a style of music and a dance. it is mostly related to ancient harvest celebrations  love  patriotism or social issues. its music is coordinated by a musical instrument called the  dhol . bhangra is not just music but a dance  a celebration of the harvest where people beat the dhol (drum)  sing boliyaan (lyrics) and dance. it developed further with the vaisakhi festival of the sikhs. the dances of sri lanka include the devil dances (yakun natima)  a carefully crafted ritual reaching far back into sri lanka s pre-buddhist past that combines ancient  ayurvedic  concepts of disease causation with psychological manipulation and combines many aspects including sinhalese cosmology. their influence can be seen on the classical dances of sri lanka.  the dances of the middle east are usually the traditional forms of circle dancing which are modernized to an extent. they would include dabke  tamzara  assyrian folk dance  kurdish dance  armenian dance and turkish dance  among others. all these forms of dances would usually involve participants engaging each other by holding hands or arms (depending on the style of the dance). they would make rhythmic moves with their legs and shoulders as they curve around the dance floor. the head of the dance would generally hold a cane or handkerchief.   === europe and north america ===  folk dances vary across europe and may date back hundreds or thousands of years  but many have features in common such as group participation led by a caller  hand-holding or arm-linking between participants  and fixed musical forms known as caroles. some  such as the maypole dance are common to many nations  while others such as the céilidh and the polka are deeply-rooted in a single culture. some european folk dances such as the square dance were brought to the new world and subsequently became part of american culture. ballet developed first in italy and then in france from lavish court spectacles that combined music  drama  poetry  song  costumes and dance. members of the court nobility took part as performers. during the reign of louis xiv  himself a dancer  dance became more codified. professional dancers began to take the place of court amateurs  and ballet masters were licensed by the french government. the first ballet dance academy was the académie royale de danse (royal dance academy)  opened in paris in 1661. shortly thereafter
 the first institutionalized ballet troupe  associated with the academy  was formed  this troupe began as an all-male ensemble but by 1681 opened to include women as well.20th century concert dance brought an explosion of innovation in dance style characterized by an exploration of freer technique. early pioneers of what became known as modern dance include loie fuller  isadora duncan  mary wigman and ruth st. denis. the relationship of music to dance serves as the basis for eurhythmics  devised by emile jaques-dalcroze  which was influential to the development of modern dance and modern ballet through artists such as marie rambert. eurythmy  developed by rudolf steiner and marie steiner-von sivers  combines formal elements reminiscent of traditional dance with the new freer style  and introduced a complex new vocabulary to dance. in the 1920s  important founders of the new style such as martha graham and doris humphrey began their work. since this time  a wide variety of dance styles have been developed  see modern dance. african american dance developed in everyday spaces  rather than in dance studios  schools or companies. tap dance  disco  jazz dance  swing dance  hip hop dance  the lindy hop with its relationship to rock and roll music and rock and roll dance have had a global influence. dance styles fusing classical ballet technique with african-american dance have also appeared in the 21st century  including hiplet.   === latin america ===  dance is central to latin american social life and culture. brazilian samba  argentinian tango  and cuban salsa are internationally popular partner dances  and other national dances—merengue  cueca  plena  jarabe  joropo  marinera  cumbia  bachata and others—are important components of their respective countries  cultures. traditional carnival festivals incorporate these and other dances in enormous celebrations. dance has played an important role in forging a collective identity among the many cultural and ethnic groups of latin america. dance served to unite the many african  european  and indigenous peoples of the region. certain dance genres  such as capoeira  and body movements  especially the characteristic quebrada or pelvis swing  have been variously banned and celebrated throughout latin american history.   === united states === hip hop originated in new york  specifically in the area known as the bronx. it was created for those who struggled in society and didn t seem to have a voice in the community that surrounded them because of their lack of wealth. it helped those in the same situation come together and speak about difficult topics by using movement and feeling.   == dance education == dance studies are offered through the arts and humanities programs of many higher education institutions. some universities offer bachelor of arts and higher academic degrees in dance. a dance study curriculum may encompass a diverse range of courses and topics  including dance practice and performance  choreography  ethnochoreology 
kinesiology  dance notation  and dance therapy.   == occupations ==   === professional dancers === professional dancers are usually employed on contract or for particular performances or productions. the professional life of a dancer is generally one of constantly changing work situations  strong competitive pressure and low pay. consequently  professional dancers often must supplement their incomes to achieve financial stability. in the u.s. many professional dancers belong to unions (such as the american guild of musical artists  screen actors guild and actors  equity association) that establish working conditions and minimum salaries for their members. professional dancers must possess large amounts of athleticism. to lead a successful career  it is advantageous to be versatile in many styles of dance  have a strong technical background and to utilize other forms of physical training to remain fit and healthy.   === dance teachers === dance teachers typically focus on teaching dance performance  or coaching competitive dancers  or both. they typically have performance experience in the types of dance they teach or coach. for example  dancesport teachers and coaches are often tournament dancers or former dancesport performers. dance teachers may be self-employed  or employed by dance schools or general education institutions with dance programs. some work for university programs or other schools that are associated with professional classical dance (e.g.  ballet) or modern dance companies. others are employed by smaller  privately owned dance schools that offer dance training and performance coaching for various types of dance.   === choreographers === choreographers are the ones that design the dancing movements within a dance  they are often university trained and are typically employed for particular projects or  more rarely may work on contract as the resident choreographer for a specific dance company.   == competitions ==  a dance competition is an organized event in which contestants perform dances before a judge or judges for awards  and in some cases  monetary prizes. there are several major types of dance competitions  distinguished primarily by the style or styles of dances performed. major types of dance competitions include   competitive dance  in which a variety of theater dance styles  such as acro  ballet  jazz  hip-hop  lyrical  and tap  are permitted. open competitions  that permit a wide variety of dance styles. an example of this is the tv program so you think you can dance. dancesport  which is focused exclusively on ballroom and latin dance. examples of this are tv programs dancing with the stars and strictly come dancing. single-style competitions  such as  highland dance  dance team  and irish dance  that only permit a single dance style.in addition  there are numerous dance competitions shows presented on television and other mass media.   == gallery ==                        
                                                == see also == art outline of performing arts outline of dance index of dance articles human body   == notes ==   == references ==   == further reading == abra  allison.  going to the palais  a social and cultural history of dancing and dance halls in britain  1918–1960.  contemporary british history (sep 2016) 30#3 pp. 432–433. blogg  martin. dance and the christian faith  a form of knowing  the lutterworth press (2011)  isbn 978-0-7188-9249-4 carter  a. (1998) the routledge dance studies reader. routledge. isbn 0-415-16447-8. cohen  s  j. (1992) dance as a theatre art  source readings in dance history from 1581 to the present. princeton book co. isbn 0-87127-173-7. daly  a. (2002) critical gestures  writings on dance and culture. wesleyan university press. isbn 0-8195-6566-0. miller  james  l. (1986) measures of wisdom  the cosmic dance in classical and christian antiquity  university of toronto press. isbn 0-8020-2553-6.   == external links ==  chisholm  hugh  ed. (1911).  dance  . encyclopædia britannica (11th ed.). cambridge university press. historic illustrations of dancing from 3300 bc to 1911 ad from project gutenberg united states national museum of dance and hall of fame
a ballet dancer (italian  ballerina [balleˈriːna] fem.  ballerino [balleˈriːno] masc.) is a person who practices the art of classical ballet. both females and males can practice ballet  however  dancers have a strict hierarchy and strict gender roles. they rely on years of extensive training and proper technique to become a part of professional companies. ballet dancers are at a high risk of injury due to the demanding technique of ballet.   == training and technique == ballet dancers typically begin training between the ages of 2-4 (for females) or 5-7 (for male dancers) if they desire to perform professionally. training does not end when ballet dancers are hired by a professional company. they must attend ballet class six days a week to keep themselves fit and aware. ballet is a strict form of art  and the dancer must be very athletic and flexible. ballet dancers begin their classes at the barre  a wooden beam that runs along the walls of the ballet studio. dancers use the barre to support themselves during exercises. barre work is designed to warm up the body and stretch muscles to prepare for center work  where they execute exercises without the barre. center work in the middle of the room starts out with slower exercises  gradually leading up to faster exercises and larger movements. ballet dancers finish center work practicing big leaps across the floor which is called grande allegro. after center work  females present exercises on pointe  or on their toes  supported by special pointe shoes. males practice jumps and turns. they may practice partner work together.   == injuries == ballet dancers are susceptible to injury because they are constantly putting strain and stress on their bodies and their feet. a ballet dancer s goal is to make physically demanding choreography appear effortless. ballet dancers increase their risk of injury if they start training earlier than the age of ten. however  many ballet dancers do start on the average age of 6 to 8 years old.the upper body of a ballet dancer is prone to injury because choreography and class exercises requires them to exert energy into contorting their backs and hips. back bends cause the back to pinch  making the spine vulnerable to injuries such as spasms and pinched nerves. extending the legs and holding them in the air while turned out causes damage to the hips. such damage includes strains  fatigue fractures  and bone density loss.injuries are common in ballet dancers because ballet consists of putting the body in unnatural positions. one such position is first position  in which the heels are placed together as the toes point outward  rotating  or  turning out  the legs. if first position is done incorrectly it can cause knee problems  however  when done correctly (turning out with the hips rather than the knees) it should increase flexibility and reduce pressure on the knees. meniscal tears and dislocations can happen at the knees when positioned
incorrectly because it is easy to let the knees slide forward while turned out in first position. ballet dancer s feet are prone to fractures and other damage. landing incorrectly (not through the foot  with knees bent) from jumps and working in pointe shoes may increase risk of broken bones and weakened ankles where care and attention is not taken by a conscientious teacher and student.  tendonitis is common in female ballet dancers because pointe work is strenuous on their ankles. landing from jumps incorrectly may also lead to shin splints  in which the muscle separates from the bone.class time is used to correct any habits that could lead to injury. if the ballet dancer is properly trained  the dancer will decrease their risk of injury. some ballet dancers also turn to stretching or other methods of cross training  like pilates  yoga  non impact cardio  and swimming.  this  outside cross training  attempts to minimize the risk of bodily damage by increasing strength  exercise diversity  and stamina. nevertheless  injuries are a common occurrence in performances. most injuries do not show up until later in a ballet dancer s life  after years of continuous strain.   == gendered titles == traditionally  gender-specific titles are used for ballet dancers. in french  a male ballet dancer is referred to as a danseur and a female as a danseuse. in italian  a ballerina is a female who typically holds a principal title within a ballet company  the title for equally ranked males is ballerino. in italian  the common term for a male dancer is danzatore and a female dancer is a danzatrice.these terms are rarely used in english. since ballerino is not used in english  it does not enjoy the same connotation as ballerina. a regular male dancer in italy is called a danzatore  while ballerino usually denotes a principal male ballet dancer in italy. in the english speaking world  boys or men who dance classical ballet are usually referred to as (male) ballet dancers. often  ballerino  is used in english-based countries as slang. as late as the 1950s a ballerina was the principal female dancer of a ballet company who was also very accomplished in the international world of ballet  especially beyond her own company  female dancers who danced ballet were then called danseuses or simply ballet dancers. ballerina was a critical accolade bestowed on relatively few female dancers  somewhat similar to the title diva in opera. the male version of this term is danseur noble (french). since the 1960s  however  the term has lost this honorific aspect and is applied generally to women who are ballet dancers.in the original italian  the terms ballerino (a male dancer  usually in ballet) and ballerina do not imply the accomplished and critically acclaimed dancers once meant by the terms ballerina and danseur noble when used in english. rather  they simply mean one who dances ballet.
italian terms that do convey an accomplished female ballet dancer are prima ballerina and prima ballerina assoluta (the french word étoile is used in this sense at the scala ballet company in milan but has a different meaning at the paris opera ballet.) danzatore (male) and danzatrice (female) are general terms in italian to signify dancers. the term ballerina is sometimes used to denote a well-trained and highly accomplished female classical ballet dancer. in such cases  it is a critical accolade that signifies exceptional talent and accomplishment.   == hierarchic titles == many use the term ballerina incorrectly  often using it to describe any female ballet student or dancer. ballerina was once a rank given only to the most exceptional female soloists.   === women ===  more or less  depending on the source  the rankings for women—from highest to lowest—used to be   prima ballerina assoluta (italy) prima ballerina  premier sujet or première danseuse sujet coryphée corps de ballet   === men === for men  the ranks were   premier danseur noble premier danseur danseur sujet coryphée corps de ballet ballerino   === today === ballet companies continue to rank their dancers in hierarchical fashion  although most have adopted a gender neutral classification system  and very few recognise a single leading dancer above all other company members. in most large companies  there are usually several leading dancers of each gender  titled principal dancer or étoile to reflect their seniority  and more often  their status within the company. the most common rankings (in english) are   principal dancer soloist (or first soloist) demi-soloist (or second soloist) corps de ballet apprenticethe title of prima ballerina assoluta is rarely used  and it is usually reserved as a mark of respect for an internationally renowned dancer who has had a highly notable career. dancers who are identified as a guest artist are usually those who have achieved a high rank with their home company  and have subsequently been engaged to dance with other ballet companies around the world  normally performing the lead role.  they are usually principal dancers or soloists with their home company  but given the title of guest artist when performing with another company.   === prima ballerina assoluta === the title or rank of prima ballerina assoluta was originally inspired by the italian ballet masters of the early romantic ballet and was bestowed on a ballerina who was considered to be exceptionally talented  above the standard of other leading ballerinas. the title is very rarely used today and recent uses have typically been symbolic  in recognition of a notable career and as a result  it is commonly viewed as an honour rather than an active rank.   == see also == russian ballet western stereotype of the male ballet dancer women in dance   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to ballet dancers at wikimedia commons
hip-hop dance refers to street dance styles primarily performed to hip-hop music or that have evolved as part of hip-hop culture. it includes a wide range of styles primarily breaking  which was created in the 1970s and made popular by dance crews in the united states. the television show soul train and the 1980s films breakin  beat street  and wild style showcased these crews and dance styles in their early stages  therefore  giving hip-hop mainstream exposure. the dance industry responded with a commercial  studio-based version of hip-hop—sometimes called  new style —and a hip-hop influenced style of jazz dance called  jazz-funk . classically trained dancers developed these studio styles in order to create choreography from the hip-hop dances that were performed on the street. because of this development  hip-hop dance is practiced in both dance studios and outdoor spaces. the commercialization of hip-hop dance continued into the 1990s and 2000s with the production of several television shows and movies such as the grind  planet b-boy  rize  streetdance 3d  america s best dance crew  saigon electric  the step up film series  and the lxd  a web series. though the dance is established in entertainment  including mild representation in theater  it maintains a strong presence in urban neighborhoods which has led to the creation of street dance derivatives memphis jookin  turfing  jerkin  and krump. 1980s films  television shows  and the internet have contributed to introducing hip-hop dance outside the united states. since being exposed  educational opportunities and dance competitions have helped maintain its presence worldwide. europe hosts several international hip-hop dance competitions such as the uk b-boy championships  juste debout  and eurobattle. australia hosts a team-based competition called world supremacy battlegrounds and japan hosts a two-on-two competition called world dance colosseum. what distinguishes hip-hop from other forms of dance is that it is often  freestyle  (improvisational) in nature and hip-hop dance crews often engage in freestyle dance competitions—colloquially referred to as  battles . crews  freestyling  and battles are identifiers of this style. hip-hop dance can be a form of entertainment or a hobby. it can also be a way to stay active in competitive dance and a way to make a living by dancing professionally.   == history ==  hip-hop dance is a broad category that includes a variety of styles. the older dance styles that were created in the 1970s include uprock  breaking  and the funk styles. breaking was created in the bronx  new york in the early 1970s. in its earliest form  it began as elaborations on james brown s  good foot  dance which debuted in 1972. breaking at this period was not primarily floor-oriented as seen today  it started out as toprock which dancers perform while standing up. an influence on toprock was uprock which was created in brooklyn  new york. uprock looks similar to toprock  but it is
more aggressive and looks like a fight. uprock is also performed with partners  but in toprock—and in breaking in general—each person takes turns dancing. in 1973  dj kool herc invented the break beat. a break beat is a rhythmic  musical interlude of a song that has been looped over and over again to extend that instrumental solo. kool herc did this to provide a means for dancers who attended his parties to demonstrate their skills. b-boy and b-girl stands for  break-boy  and  break-girl  b-boys and b-girls dance to the break of a record. further influenced by martial arts and gymnastics  breaking went from being a purely upright dance style—toprock only—to becoming more floor-oriented. at the same time that breaking was developing in new york  other styles were being created in california. the funk styles refer to several street dance styles created in california in the 1970s such as roboting  bopping  hitting  locking  bustin  popping  boogaloo  strutting  sac-ing  and dime-stopping. out of all of these dances  boogaloo is one of the oldest. it started out as a 1960s fad dance and was the subject of several songs released during that time such as  do the boogaloo  and  my baby likes to boogaloo . from being a fad  it developed into a street dance style called boogaloo in oakland  ca  as well as a separate music genre called latin boogaloo. the most popular and widely practiced of the funk styles are locking and popping. the television show soul train played a large role in giving these styles commercial exposure. both the lockers and the electric boogaloos—dance crews responsible for the spread of locking and popping—performed on this show.it is historically inaccurate to say that the funk styles were always considered hip-hop. in an interview with racked  moncell durden  assistant dance professor at the university of southern california  is quoted as saying  hip-hop dance involves two dances  breaking and social dances. that s it. nothing else is hip-hop.  the funk styles were adopted into hip-hop in large part due to the media. the media identified these styles as  breakdance  which caused confusion about their origin. they were created on the west coast independent from breaking and were originally danced to funk music  rather than hip-hop music.as breaking  locking  and popping gained popularity in the 1980s  hip-hop social dancing (party dancing) started to develop. novelty and fad dances such as the roger rabbit  the cabbage patch  and the worm appeared in the 1980s followed by the humpty dance and the running man in the 1990s. the music of the day was the driving force in the development of these dances. for example  the 1980s rap group gucci crew ii had a song called  the cabbage patch  that the dance of the same name was based on. 2000s era social dances include the cha cha
slide  the cat daddy  and the dougie. the previously mentioned dances are a sample of the many that have appeared since hip-hop developed into a distinct dance style. like hip-hop music  hip-hop social dancing continues to change as new songs are released and new dances are created to accompany them.   == main styles ==   === breaking ===  breaking was created in the south bronx  new york city during the early 1970s. it is the first hip-hop dance style. at the time of its creation  it was the only hip-hop dance style because afrika bambaataa classified it as one of the five pillars of hip-hop culture along with mcing (rapping)  djing (turntablism)  graffiti writing (bombing)  and knowledge. though african americans created breaking  puerto ricans maintained its growth and development when it was considered a fad in the late 1970s. in a 2001 interview richard  crazy legs  colón  the president of rock steady crew  commented on how puerto ricans contributed to breaking   i think the difference is when the brothas first started doing [it] and it was at its infancy they weren t doing acrobatic moves. that didn t come into play until more puerto ricans got involved in the mid 70s. we then took the dance  evolved it and kept it alive. in  79 i was getting dissed. i would go into a dance and i would get dissed by a lot of brothas who would ask  why y all still doing that dance  that s played out . by 79  there were very few african american brothas that was doing this... we always maintained the flava. it was like a changing of the guard and all we did was add more flava to something that already existed.  breaking includes four foundational dances  toprock  footwork-oriented steps performed while standing up  downrock  footwork performed with both hands and feet on the floor  freezes  stylish poses done on your hands  and power moves  complex and impressive acrobatic moves. transitions from toprock to downrock are called  drops. traditionally  breakers dance within a cypher or an apache line. a cypher is a circular shaped dance space formed by spectators that breakers use to perform or battle in. cyphers work well for one-on-one b-boy or b-girl (break-boy/break-girl) battles  however  apache lines are more appropriate when the battle is between two crews—teams of street dancers. in contrast to the circular shape of a cypher  competing crews face each other in an apache line  challenge each other  and execute their burns (a move intended to humiliate the opponent  i.e. crotch grabbing).   === locking ===  locking  originally called campbellocking  was created in 1969 in los angeles  california by don  campbellock  campbell and popularized by his crew the lockers. in addition to campbell  the original members of the lockers were fred
 mr. penguin  berry  leo  fluky luke  williamson  adolfo  shabba-doo  quiñones  bill  slim the robot  williams  greg  campbellock jr  pope  and toni basil  who also served as the group s manager. at the 2009 world hip hop dance championships  basil became the first female recipient of the living legend award in honor of her role in giving locking commercial exposure.locking looks similar to popping  and the two are frequently confused by the casual observer. in locking  dancers hold their positions longer. the lock is the primary move used in locking. it is  similar to a freeze or a sudden pause.  a locker s dancing is characterized by frequently locking in place and after a brief freeze moving again. according to dance spirit magazine  a dancer cannot perform both locking and popping simultaneously  thus  it is incorrect to call locking  pop-locking . while both styles are from los angeles  locking and popping are two distinct funk styles with their own histories  their own set of dance moves  their own pioneers  and their own competition categories. locking is more playful and character-driven  whereas popping is more illusory. in popping  dancers push the boundaries of what they can do with their bodies. locking has specific dance moves that distinguish it from popping and other funk styles. in the 2006 book total chaos  hip-hop historian jorge  popmaster fabel  pabon lists some of these moves which include  the lock  points  skeeter [rabbits]  scooby doos  stop  n go  which-away  and the fancies.  in addition  lockers commonly use a distinctive dress style characterized by colorful clothing with stripes and suspenders.   === popping ===  popping was derived from the earlier boogaloo street dance movement taking place in oakland  california during the late 1960s  the boogaloo dance form incorporated techniques of soulful footwork steps  arm movements  stop-motion animation  the robot  & posing hard - which contracted muscles during robotic poses to the music of funk. throughout the 1960s and 1970s - boogaloo groups in oakland  ca such as one plus one  the black resurgents and the black messengers would help popularize the dance. early boogaloo movements would inspire groups throughout the san francisco bay area and eventually spread to fresno  california in the 1970s and popularized by samuel  boogaloo sam  solomon and his crew the electric boogaloos. it is based on the technique of quickly contracting and relaxing muscles to cause a jerk in a dancer s body  referred to as a pop or a hit. when performed correctly  each hit is synchronized to the rhythm and beats of the music. popping is also used as an umbrella term to refer to a wide range of closely related illusionary dance styles such as strobing  liquid  animation  twisto-flex  and
waving. dancers often integrate these styles with standard popping to create a more varied performance. in all of these subgenres it appears to the spectator that the body is popping. the difference between each subgenre is how exaggerated the popping is. in liquid  the body movements look like water. the popping is so smooth that the movements do not look like popping at all  they look fluid. the opposite of this is strobing (also called ticking) in which the movements are staccato and jerky.popping as an umbrella term also includes gliding. gliding is a lower body dance performed with little to no movements in the chest or arms. in gliding a dancer appears as if they are drifting across the floor on ice. opposite from gliding is tutting  an upper body dance that uses the arms  hands  and wrists to form right angles and create geometric box-like shapes. tutting can be done primarily with the fingers rather than the arms. this method is called finger tutting. in both variations the movements are intricate  linear  and form 90° or 45° angles. in practice  tutting looks like the characters on the art of ancient egypt  hence the name—a reference to king tut. while popping as an umbrella term is widely used by hip-hop dancers and in competitive hip-hop dancing  timothy  popin  pete  solomon of the electric boogaloos disagrees with the use of the word  popping  in this way. many of these related styles (animation  liquid  tutting  etc.) can not be traced to one person or group. solomon states  there are people who wave and there are people who tut. they re not popping. i say this to give the people who created other styles their just dues and their props.    == derivative street styles ==  decades after breaking  locking  and popping became established  four new dance styles appeared. three of them come from california and one comes from tennessee. memphis jookin  was created in the 1980s in memphis  tennessee. it is an evolution of an older memphis line dance called the gangsta  walk. according to dance magazine  jookin is characterized by dancers  gliding footwork... popping and waving... [and] using the tips of their sneakers to balance on pointe.  gliding on tiptoes is fundamental to this dance. while watching a jookin  battle in jackson  tennessee  dance critic alastair macaulay observed that  the most evidently sensational feature of jookin is the extensive use of what a ballet observer is bound to call pointwork  the men  in sneakers  go onto tiptoe... many of the men not only rose onto point but also hopped  turned  ran and balanced on point.  jookers have traditionally practiced their moves at the crystal palace skating rink in memphis  which is akin to how milongueros practice their moves in public spaces in buenos aires.turfing  an acronym for taking up
room on the floor  was created in 2002 by jeriel bey in oakland  california. turfing is a fusion of miming and gliding that places heavy emphasis on storytelling (through movement) and illusion. other than san francisco bay area pride  turfing avoided becoming a fad due to local turf dance competitions and local youth programs that promote turfing as a form of physical activity.the dance style jerkin  was popularized in 2009 by the new boyz s rap song  you re a jerk . this song went viral via their myspace page before they had a manager or were signed to a record label. after hearing about the song  los angeles radio station power 106 hired the new boyz to perform at local high schools. these shows led to  you re a jerk  entering the radio s playlist. later the same year  rap duo audio push released the song and video  teach me how to jerk  which showcased the different dance moves within jerkin  including the reject—the running man done in reverse. dancers who perform jerkin  typically wear bright colors  skinny jeans  mohawks  and vans sneakers. this trend echos locking dancers in the 1970s who traditionally wore suspenders and black and white striped socks. of the dance  journalist jeff weiss from la weekly stated  for a youth culture weaned on the cult of individualism  jerkin  is its apotheosis.  similar to breaking  locking  and popping  jerkin s popularity spread through dance crews. for example  the rej3ctz  (crew) created both the cat daddy and the reject dance moves.although jookin  turfing  and jerkin  generated regional support and media attention  none have reached the same zenith as krumping. ceasare  tight eyez  willis and jo artis  big mijo  ratti created krumping in the early 2000s in south central  los angeles. it was only practiced in los angeles until it gained mainstream exposure after being featured in several music videos and showcased in the krumping documentary rize. rize was screened at several film festivals before it was commercially released in the summer of 2005. clowning  the less aggressive predecessor to krumping  was created in 1992 by thomas  tommy the clown  johnson. johnson and his dancers would paint their faces and perform clowning for children at birthday parties or for the general public at other functions as a form of entertainment. in contrast  krumping focuses on highly energetic battles and movements which johnson describes as intense  fast-paced  and sharp. of the dance  journalist taisha paggett from dance magazine stated  if movement were words  [krumping] would be a poetry slam.  compared to breaking and the funk styles  jookin  turfing  jerkin  and krumping are relatively new. the music driving the dances and the cultural similarities between these street dance styles  the funk styles  and breaking have brought them together under the
same subculture of hip-hop.   == dance industry ==   === commercial/new style ===  the dance industry responded to hip-hop dance by creating a commercial version of it. this urban choreography or studio hip-hop  sometimes called  new style  is the kind of hip-hop dance seen in rap  r&b  and pop music videos and concerts. from the point of view of someone deeply immersed in hip-hop culture  anything that looks like hip-hop dance that did not come from the streets and is not improvisational in nature is not a true hip-hop dance form. in an interview with dance magazine  choreographer and hip-hop dance teacher emilio  buddha stretch  austin  jr. described his point-of-view   stage performance can suppress improvisation which defined hip-hop dance early in its development. furthermore  meshing different dance styles together dissolves their structures and identities. in an interview with the bronx journal  choreographer and artistic director safi thomas expressed a similar qualm as austin concerning hip-hop instruction within the studio   the term  new style  was created by dancers outside the united states. according to moncell durden  adjunct professor at drexel university and director of the film history and concept of hip-hop dance  the 1992 dance documentary wreckin  shop from brooklyn was very influential to hip-hop dancers in france and japan. these dancers wanted to move like the new york hip-hop dancers who were profiled in the documentary. they called the social dancing (party dancing) they saw  new style  which was short for  new york style .in the context of the commercial dance industry  hip hop (or new style hip-hop for dancers in france and japan) is choreographed urban party dancing with studio technique added to it. from a technical aspect  it is characterized as hard-hitting involving flexibility and isolations—moving a specific body part independently from others.  a significant juncture in the development of hip-hop was the addition of eight-counts  a method of counting dance steps to stay in sync with the music. toni basil introduced this studio technique into locking in the 1970s. basil was trained in ballet before being introduced to street dance by don campbell  the creator of locking and founding member of the lockers dance crew. she is responsible for teaching the rest of the lockers how to dance to counts. traditionally hip-hop dance  or any form of street dance  is not performed to counts as these styles were created on the street rather than in a studio setting. therefore  the introduction of counts was a pivotal move into bringing hip-hop dance from the street into the studio. even with this addition  it would be years before commercial hip-hop developed into its current form. a second important event in the development of hip-hop was the start of hip-hop dance instruction. buddha stretch was a pioneer in this field. he started teaching formal hip-hop dance classes in 1989 at broadway dance center in new
york city where he continues to teach today. around the same time  hip-hop party dancing started to appear in music videos and on television—this was another important point in the development and commercialization of hip-hop. an early example of this is when janet jackson performed the running man in her 1989 music video for the song  rhythm nation  which was choreographed by street dancer anthony thomas. the dance was so popular during this time it was also performed by 1990s rappers mc hammer and vanilla ice in their choreographed routines. michael jackson also used hip-hop in his 1992 music video  remember the time  which was choreographed by a then 21-year-old fatima robinson. at the time  robinson was a street dancer with no formal training and  remember the time  was her first music video job. according to mtv.com   dances have always been a part of hip-hop culture — from the running man to the soulja boy dance...  and this era was the start of commercial hip-hop choreography as it looks today  dance routines are not specific to one genre (strictly popping  strictly locking  or strictly breaking) but rather an amalgamation of urban party dancing with studio technique added to it.   === jazz-funk === another style the dance industry created in response to hip-hop was jazz-funk. jazz-funk (also called street-jazz) is a hybrid of hip-hop and jazz dance. this style was shown in its early form on a sketch comedy series called in living color. the resident dance troupe  the fly girls  opened and closed every show with a hip-hop and jazz performance choreographed by rosie perez. r&b singer beyoncé uses this style. korean dance crew prepix also uses this style. they have choreographed for k-pop singers jay park and g.na as well as for k-pop boy bands 2pm and b2st. although jazz-funk borrows from hip-hop dance  it is not considered a style of hip-hop because the foundational movements are jazz. in hip-hop—even in lyrical hip-hop—there are no pirouettes or arabesques and dancers do not perform on relevé (on the balls of the feet). however  these methods are used in jazz-funk and in jazz dance in general.   === business developments === other developments in the dance industry occurred in response to the growing popularity of hip-hop. on the traveling convention circuit there were tap  ballet  and jazz dance conventions  but there were none specifically for hip-hop. the same void existed in dancewear. there was dancewear for tap  ballet  and jazz dancers but none for hip-hop dancers. monsters of hip hop and nappytabs dancewear were formed to answer to both needs. nappytabs is the first line of hip-hop dancewear. because their clothing is made for hip-hop dancers  they do not sell leotards  unitards  tights  or leg warmers. their line consists of tank tops  shorts  t-shirts  sweat pants  harem pants  and hoodies. monsters of hip hop (mohh) was founded in
2003 in baltimore  maryland by andy funk  becky funk  and angie servant. the convention is dedicated exclusively to hip-hop instruction. fatima robinson  stefan  mr. wiggles  clemente  and timothy  popin  pete  solomon have taught classes at mohh in the past. every year  the convention brings together its top student dancers for a professionally choreographed showcase in los angeles called monsters of hip hop  the show.mohh may have been the first hip-hop dance convention  but it is not the only one that exists. urban dance camp (udc) is a six-week-long german-based dance convention held every year in lörrach  a small town on the border of france and switzerland. in a report on the event by a local paper  bettina kraft  the manager of udc  estimated that 85% of the participants were from outside germany. in 2009 kraft created urban dance showcase  a parallel event to udc reserved only for performances by professional choreographers  dance crews  and udc teachers. dancers such as shaun evaristo  les twins  i.am.me  b-boy lilou  and b-boy hong 10 have performed at the showcase in the past.aside from dancewear and conventions  developments in agency representation occurred as well. although limited  representation for individual dancers had existed since the 1980s at the beginning of the music video era due to the pioneering work of talent agent julie mcdonald. however  the uk-based dance agencies prodance and superbad talent were created to exclusively represent street dancers.   == entertainment ==   === movies === the entertainment industry has been largely responsible for introducing hip-hop dance to mainstream audiences around the world. the first hip-hop films wild style  beat street  and breakin  were made in the 1980s. when wild style opened in japan  rock steady crew performed breaking in tokyo s harajuku shopping district to promote the film. wild style was the first movie centered around hip-hop culture  however  flashdance was the first commercially released film to feature breaking. in 1984  beat street was released in west germany and screened at the cannes film festival which helped to introduce breaking  graffiti writing  and turntablism to this part of europe. breakin  and breakin  2  electric boogaloo brought the funk styles to the cinema. breaking  locking  popping  and waacking were performed in these films. at this time in the 1980s  the united states was not the only country producing hip-hop films. in 1985  yuen woo-ping directed a hip-hop themed romantic comedy in hong kong called mismatched couples starring donnie yen. another hip-hop film  electro rock  was released the same year in the united kingdom. this film featured a then 14-year-old hanifa  bubbles  mcqueen hudson  the uk s first b-girl.several hip-hop dance films were produced after the millennium. the freshest kids  a history of the b-boy  neukölln unlimited  b-girl  bouncing cats  planet
b-boy  and battle of the year  the dream team all showcase breaking. films such as honey  save the last dance  you got served  the step up film series  streetdance 3d  hype nation  saigon electric  berlin dance battle 3d  and abcd  any body can dance showcase all forms of hip-hop dance  especially new style hip-hop. rize  the heart of krump  and shake city 101 are documentaries about krumping. all of these movies and documentaries are examples of films where the plot and theme surround hip-hop dance and how it affects the characters  lives. bouncing cats is the story of b-boy abraham  abramz  tekya who uses b-boying to empower youth in uganda. in 2010  the film won  outstanding achievement in documentary filmmaking  at newport beach film festival and  best documentary feature  at urbanworld film festival. saigon electric was vietnam s first hip-hop film. it was written  produced  and directed by vietnamese-american filmmaker stephane gauger. the film is about two female dancers (a ribbon dancer and a hip-hop dancer) and how their respective romances  the threat of their community center being torn down  and the stress of an upcoming dance battle affects their friendship. the film was choreographed by viet max and ricky cole. in 2012  it won a golden kite prize (the vietnamese equivalent of the oscars/baftas) for  best film  and  best actress .   === television === before reaching movie audiences  hip-hop dance was already being broadcast on television. soul train was a syndicated  music variety show that featured social dancing and performances by african-american soul  funk  and r&b singers. the show was broadcast in south korea via the us armed forces korea network. before officially becoming a crew  the lockers made several appearances on this show. after becoming a crew  the electric boogaloos also appeared on the show. soul train premiered in 1970. during its 36 year run  the resident freestyle dancers were referred to as the soul train gang. auditions were held in 1971 when the show moved from chicago  illinois to los angeles  california. dancers who wanted to get on soul train after this time had to rely on word-of-mouth recommendations from dancers who were already employed by the show. a regular feature during the broadcast was the soul train line. to participate  the dancers formed two lines of equal length facing each other with a large space in between them. each dancer in line would take their turn dancing down the middle. other music variety shows on television at this time were american bandstand  solid gold  and top of the pops. unlike soul train which focused on soul and funk  these shows promoted top 40 music and pop acts. solid gold employed a permanent dance troupe called the solid gold dancers who performed choreographed routines to musical performances. lucinda dickey  an actress and dancer
who played the lead role in the breakin   films  appeared on the show during the 1982–1983 season as a solid gold dancer. in 1983  street dancers marc  mr. freeze  lemberger from rock steady crew  timothy  popin  pete  solomon and dane  robot dane  parker from the electric boogaloos  and locking dancers alpha  omega  anderson and lewis  deputy  green also appeared on solid gold during a performance to the song  what a feeling  from the movie flashdance. in 1982 during a performance in london on top of the pops  street dancer jeffrey daniel performed popping and the backslide during the song  a night to remember . this was the first time popping was shown on british television  thus spreading its popularity in the united kingdom. a year later  michael jackson also performed the backslide during a performance of  billie jean  on the motown 25 tv special. he called it the moonwalk and his performance spread its popularity all over the world to much larger extent than daniel s performance did. it was jeffrey daniel who taught michael jackson how to do the backslide/moonwalk.   a few hip-hop dance shows appeared on television in the 1990s such as 1991 s the party machine with nia peeples and 1992 s the grind. several hip-hop dance shows premiered in the 2000s including (but not limited to) dance fever  dance 360  the wade robson project  mtv dance crew  america s best dance crew  dance on sunset  and shake it up. in 2006  mtv france documented the creation of a dance crew for an original series called mtv dance crew. viewers were able to see the crew from auditions to the selection of the final eight who were subsequently named original soul. original soul was coached by three professional choreographers who mentored them and helped refine their dancing. over the course of 32 episodes they routinely participated in professional dance battles including the popping battle at juste debout  the seven 2 smoke battle at the notorious ibe  and b-boy battles at chelles battle pro. b-boy lilou  b-boy crew phase t  and promoter bruce ykanji (the founder of juste debout) all made appearances in the show.the founders of hip hop international  howard and karen schwartz  created the reality hip-hop dance competition america s best dance crew (abdc) in 2008. on the show  different crews competed in dance challenges against each other every week. abdc contributed to the exposure of several crews such as jabbawockeez  quest  beat freaks  and poreotics. these crews now have official websites  work with musical artists  and perform at live events. the jabbawockeez had a show in las vegas  nevada called müs.i.c. at the monte carlo resort and casino. müs.i.c. was the first hip-hop dance stage show on the las vegas strip. in 2012  the jabbawockeez performed the show during
a five-month residency at the jupiters hotel and casino in gold coast  queensland  australia. both poreotics and hokuto  hok  konishi from quest were nominated for a 2011 mtv video music award for best choreography. poreotics was nominated with singer bruno mars for his video  the lazy song . hok was nominated for lmfao s video  party rock anthem  the rest of quest crew appeared in the video as featured dancers.in contrast to abdc  individual dancers from all backgrounds compete on the reality dance competition so you think you can dance (sytycd) and world of dance (wod). it has a similar premise to the idol series of singing competitions with initial auditions leading to the selection of a winner over the course of several episodes. in 2008  poppers robert  mr. fantastic  muraine and phillip  pacman  chbeeb auditioned during season four of the us sytycd series. neither made it to the final  top 20  but the judges were so impressed with their dancing that both were invited back to participate in a popping battle against each other on the show s live finale. according to muraine  this was the first popping battle that was nationally televised. after the battle  hip-hop dancer joshua allen was declared the winner of season four of the competition. the same year mona-jeanette berntsen  a hip-hop dancer from norway  won the first season of so you think you can dance scandinavia. in 2017  hip hop duo les twins won the inaugural season of world of dance. hip hop dance crew the lab won the following year. hip-hop dance has also been popular among viewers of the got talent series. french hip-hop dancer salah won the first season of incroyable talent in 2006. french b-boy junior won the second season in 2007. in 2008  hip-hop dancer george sampson won britain s got talent  danish popping and roboting duo robot boys won talent 2008 (da)  and hip-hop dance crew quick won the norwegian version of the show. after george sampson  dance crew diversity won the next season of britain s got talent in 2009. the same year  brazilian crew d-efeitos won qual é o seu talento  (what s your talent ). in 2010  justice crew won australia s got talent. after signing a recording contract with sony music australia  justice crew shot a video for their single  dance with me  featuring rapper flo rida and america s best dance crew alumni beat freaks. in 2015  nine years after he won incroyable talent  hip-hop dancer salah won the fourth season of arabs got talent.   === theater ===  though hip-hop dancing is established on film and on television  it has not gained the same level of exposure in theater. this may be due to the fact that the dance is performed more in film and in television than it is in a theatrical setting. b-boy and popper stefan
 mr. wiggles  clemente and hip-hop historian jorge  popmaster fabel  pabon were involved in hip-hop theater at its inception. their dance company  ghettoriginal  produced the first hip-hop stage shows  1991 s off broadway musical so  what happens now  and 1995 s jam on the groove. both shows were performed by the rock steady crew  magnificent force  and the rhythm technicians. aside from the pioneers in new york city was rennie harris  puremovement hip-hop theater company. harris founded puremovement in 1992 in philadelphia  pennsylvania. one of puremovement s theater shows rome & jewels won two black theater alliance awards and three bessie awards. in 2012  harris and his company toured egypt  israel  and the palestinian territories as part of dance motion usa  a program sponsored by the us state department to showcase american dance to other countries and promote cultural exchange.german b-boy pioneer niels  storm  robitzky has his performance roots in hip-hop theater. in 1991  robitzky—who went by the name  swipe —left germany with his crew battle squad for new york city to look for b-boy legends they could study under. when he got to new york  he met b-boy gabriel  kwikstep  dionisio who personally mentored him and introduced him to new york techniques. while in new york  he also learned about the funk styles from clemente. clemente and dionisio knew each other since dionisio was an original member of both ghettoriginal and the rhythm technicians. a year later in 1992  robitzky performed with ghettoriginal at the kennedy center in washington d.c. and at the lincoln center in new york city. it was dionisio who gave robitzky a new name   storm . in 2000  he wrote a book called von swipe zu storm  breakdance in deutschland (from swipe to storm  breakdance in germany).dancers in the united kingdom have had success in hip-hop theater. in 2006  hip-hop dance company boy blue entertainment won a laurence olivier award for their show pied piper. in 2008  into the hoods became the first hip-hop theater show to perform in london s west end. it eventually went on to become the west end s longest running dance show ever.   === online content === yak films is a three-man team that films urban dance around the world. it was founded in oakland  california by yoram savion and kash grimes. their first videos were of the turf feinz dance crew performing turfing—a regional hip-hop dance style from oakland. after generating significant views on youtube  they started yak (yoram and kash) films and added music producer ben  b zwax  tarquin to the team. from shooting videos only in the united states  they were able to easily transition to covering dance events in europe due to savion s dual french citizenship. in 2009  they filmed battle of the year s first one-on-one b-boy competition  and in 2010 they filmed dance battles
at juste debout  a french street dance competition. some of their more popular videos have been featured in oakland local and the huffington post.juba films was founded in germany by julien bam and gong bao. rather than film freestyle content  juba ( ju lien and  ba o) produces short films with a storyline. for their short b-boy film  more than bread  they won first place at the 7th international online dance festival in 2011. in 2012  the daily mail wrote an article about juba s short film  with a piece of chalk  after the video went viral and started trending on mashable. both juba films and yak films appeared at the notorious ibe s new dance media conference discussing the relationship between street dance and visual arts. although juba films has won an award and yak films has booked high-profile events  they are not the only film production teams distributing hip-hop dance videos on the internet. house of crews  strife tv  pacific rim video press  prodance tv  battle fest extreme  urban dance show  ocke films  world of dance network  and canal street tv also produce hundreds of high-quality hip-hop dance content.the legion of extraordinary dancers (the lxd) was a good-versus-evil themed web series about a group of dancers who discover they have super powers through their dance moves. each character specializes in one dance style. consequently  a wide range of styles are displayed including krumping  tutting  breaking  locking  boogaloo  and popping. the majority of the dancing shown in the series is hip-hop  however  other styles were also performed including jazz  tap  and ballet. advertisingage.com gave the series a favorable review stating  ...each episode of  lxd  packs a wealth of narrative sophistication into its eight or nine minutes. combine this with the theater-worthy production values and a cast that exerts itself to an ungodly extent  and the end result is – pun time  – extraordinary.  the lxd premiered july 7  2010 on hulu. in 2012  jon chu  the writer  director  and producer of the lxd  launched a dance channel on youtube called ds2dio (pronounced d-studio). through this channel  chu also made the lxd available on youtube. before then  it could only be viewed on hulu. september 2019 independent artist e-styles dropped a music video the poetic flow via youtube featuring one of most popular youtube  dancers today non stop marquese scott and new up in coming dancer alian 2 wavy. the video focus on hip hop dance and culture. [1]   == international competitions ==  uk b-boy championships was founded by dj hooch in 1996 in london. there are four world championship titles  breaking crew champions  solo b-boy champion  solo popping champion  and solo hip-hop champion. the world finals also include the  fresh awards  (best dressed) which are hosted and judged every year
by richard  crazy legs  colón—the president of rock steady crew. in 2011  dj hooch wrote a book about the competition called b-boy championships  from bronx to brixton. freestyle session was founded in 1997 in california by graffiti writer and dj chris  cros1  wright. it is the largest breaking competition in the united states. the main competitive event is for b-boy crews  but there are also popping and locking competitions for solo competitors. although the us is the flagship location for freestyle session  it is not the only country where it is held. promoters outside the us pay cros1 to use freestyle session s name and fly him to their location to judge the competition. using this method  freestyle session has been held in 18 other countries including poland  russia  switzerland  and venezuela. hip hop international (hhi) was founded in 2002 in the united states by howard and karen schwartz. there are two categories of competitions  world battles and world hip hop dance championship. within the world battles category  there are four titles including three-on-three breaking champions  one-on-one popping champion  one-on-one locking champion  and one-on-one all styles (freestyle) champion. the world hip hop dance championship is for hip-hop crews. there are four divisions  junior (ages 8–12)  varsity (13–17)  adult (18+)  and mega crew (all ages). each crew must have at least five but not more than nine people (mega crew must have 15–40) and must perform a routine that showcases three styles of hip-hop dance. for the 2009 competition  there were 120 crews representing 30 countries. hhi also created the usa hip hop dance championship and the television show america s best dance crew. juste debout was founded in 2002 by bruce ykanji in paris. competition categories include popping  hip-hop  locking  house  toprock  and experimental. breaking is not included to put more focus on dance styles performed while standing up  hence the name (french for just standing). there are not any team trophies at juste debout. the experimental and toprock categories are only for solo dancers  popping  new style  locking  and house are for duos. in 2008  ingrid  shéyen  gamboa  the editor-in-chief of juste debout magazine  wrote a book called hip-hop  l histoire de la danse (hip hop  a history of the dance). united dance organisation (udo) was founded in 2002 in the united kingdom. udo operates the british street dance championships  the european street dance championships  the north american championships  and the world street dance championships. the european championships are held in germany rather than in the uk. street dance kemp europe (sdk europe) is a competition and dance convention founded in 2004 in jedovnice  czech republic. there is a hip-hop crew battle and solo battles for house  krumping  locking  hip-hop male  and hip-hop female dancers. sdk europe begins every year in the summer and
lasts seven days. daytime hours are reserved primarily for dance workshops and classes taught by an international pool of instructors  competitive events are held at night. all of the classes  workshops  and competitive events are held outside. eurobattle was founded in 2005 in portugal by max from momentum crew. there are five competitive events for solo dancers including b-boying  b-girling  hip-hop  locking  and popping. the international final is held in porto but the winner of the spanish qualifying tournament also gets to compete at the uk b-boy championships in london. world supremacy battlegrounds is a hip-hop dance competition based in australia. the heritage of world supremacy battlegrounds goes back to 2002 when it began as groove  a local hip-hop competition held in sydney. over the three years that followed  the competition was renamed battlegrounds and went national to include dance crews from all over australia. it became international in 2006 when crews from the philippines  japan  and new zealand entered the competition. there are four dance crew categories  open (all ages)  junior (12 and under)  varsity (12–18)  and monster (all ages  20–40 members). for the 2011 competition  teams from indonesia  thailand  singapore  malaysia  vietnam  the philippines  japan  guam  new zealand  samoa  and south africa came to compete. world of dance tour (wod) was founded in 2008 by myron marten and david gonzales in pomona  california. it differs from other competitions because there is no final championship. wod travels to different cities in the united states  canada  and europe and holds a competition in each location  therefore  wod distinguishes itself as a tour. each tour stop is a stand-alone competition  they are all related to each other in name only. in 2013  wod traveled to new york city  vallejo  seattle  vancouver  berlin  dallas  toronto  san diego  montreal  eindhoven  boston  orlando  houston  chicago  seattle  honolulu  los angeles  union city  and antwerp. wod reached a larger audience in 2017 when nbc started airing a television show based off the competition. world dance colosseum is a two-on-two dance competition founded in japan. there are five two-on-two world championship titles  b-boying  locking  popping  hip-hop  and house. japanese dancers qualify for the international final through preliminary tournaments held in the country but foreign dancers do not qualify through tournaments because 30 of the top-ranked foreign dancers are automatically invited to participate in the final. at the final  the winning duos from the japanese tournaments compete against the top-ranked foreign duos to determine who is the best. vibe dance competition is a choreography competition that was started by joseph lising in 1995 as a greek talent show at uc irvine. it later evolved into one of the biggest competitions for choreography hip hop teams in the world  hosting teams from
all over the us  canada  the philippines  and japan.   == education == in 2004  safi thomas founded the hip-hop dance conservatory (hhdc) in new york city. thomas  goal was to provide a comprehensive education to hip-hop dancers that was comparable to what ballet  modern  and jazz dancers experience at their respective institutions. hhdc provides a formal curriculum with dance classes (breaking  freestyle  locking  etc.) and academic classes (dance theory  physiology  kinesiology  etc.) to people who want to pursue hip-hop dance as a career. it is the only educational institution in the united states that is exclusively dedicated to hip-hop dance instruction. hhdc does not grant degrees. it is a non-profit organization and repertory company that grants certifications to dancers that complete the three-year program.three years later in 2007  the university of east london s center for performing arts development (cpad) started intake for the only bachelor s degree program in the world specializing in hip-hop  urban  and global dance forms. the cpad s program also lasts three years  but it is not exclusive to hip-hop. students also study african dance  kathak  bollywood  and capoeira.   == see also == street dance house dance waacking hiplet (dance style)   == footnotes ==   == references == citations  bibliography   == external links ==
salsa is a popular form of social dance originating in eastern cuba. the salsa we hear now is said to be born in new york to a mixture of afro cuban folk dances with jazz. evidence shows that the “salsa” sound was already developed in cuba before being brought up to new york. the movements of salsa are a combination of the afro-cuban dances son  cha-cha-cha  mambo  rumba  and the danzón. the dance  along with salsa music  saw major development in the mid-1970s in new york. different regions of latin america and the united states have distinct salsa styles of their own  such as cuban  puerto rican  cali colombia  l.a. and new york styles. salsa dance socials are commonly held in night clubs  bars  ballrooms  restaurants  and outside  especially when part of an outdoor festival. in many styles of salsa dancing  as a dancer shifts their weight by stepping  the upper body remains level and nearly unaffected by the weight changes. weight shifts cause the hips to move. arm and shoulder movements are also incorporated. salsa generally uses music ranging from about 150 bpm (beats per minute) to around 250 bpm  although most dancing is done to music somewhere between 160–220 bpm. the basic salsa dance rhythm consists of taking three steps for every four beats of music. the odd number of steps creates the syncopation inherent to salsa dancing and ensures that it takes 8 beats of music to loop back to a new sequence of steps.   == origin ==  fania record label in the 60s  was the one that gave the name  salsa  to this new blend of different influences  rhythms and styles of latin music in new york city  especially in el barrio  spanish harlem  and the bronx. salsa means sauce which represented son  guaguanco  son montuno  jazz elements  latin jazz  cuban influences. prior to that time  each style was recognized in its pure original form and name. it evolved from forms such as son  son montuno  cha cha cha  and mambo which were popular in the caribbean  latin america and the latino communities in new york since the 1940s. salsa  like most music genres and dance styles  has gone through a lot of variation through the years and incorporated elements of other afro-caribbean dances such as pachanga. different regions of latin america and the united states have distinct salsa styles of their own  such as cuban  puerto rican  cali colombia. there is some controversy surrounding the origins of the word  salsa  which has been ascribed to the dance since the mid-1800s. some claim that it was based on a cry shouted by musicians while they were playing their music. others believe that the term was created by record labels to better market their music  who chose the word  salsa  because
of its spicy and hot connotations. still  others believe the term came about because salsa dancing and music is a mixture of different styles  just like salsa or  sauce  in latin american countries is a mixture of different ingredients.   == description == in many styles of salsa dancing  as a dancer shifts their weight by stepping  the upper body remains level and nearly unaffected by the weight changes. weight shifts cause the hips to move. arm and shoulder movements are also incorporated. the cuban casino style of salsa dancing involves significant movement above the waist  with up-and-down shoulder movements and shifting of the ribcage. the arms are used by the  lead  dancer to communicate or signal the  follower  either in  open  or  closed  position. the open position requires the two dancers to hold one or both hands  especially for moves that involve turns  putting arms behind the back  or moving around each other  to name a few examples. in the closed position  the leader puts the right hand on the follower s back  while the follower puts the left hand on the leader s shoulder. in the original latin american form  the forward/backward motion of salsa is done in diagonal or sideways with the 3-step weight change intact. in some styles of salsa  such as the new york style  the dancers remain mostly in front of one another (switching places)  while in latin american styles  such as cuban style  the dancers circle around each other  sometimes in 3 points. this circular style is inspired by cuban son  specifically to the beat of son montuno in the 1920s. however  as it is a popular music  it is open to improvisation and thus it is continuously evolving. modern salsa styles are associated and named to the original geographic areas that developed them. there are often devotees of each of these styles outside their home territory. characteristics that may identify a style include  timing  basic steps  foot patterns  body movement  turns and figures  attitude  dance influences and the way that partners hold each other. the point in a musical bar music where a slightly larger step is taken (the break step) and the direction the step moves can often be used to identify a style. incorporating other dance styling techniques into salsa dancing has become very common for both men and women  shimmies  leg work  arm work  body movement  spins  body isolations  shoulder shimmies  rolls  even hand styling  acrobatics and lifts. latin american styles originate from puerto rico  cuba and surrounding caribbean islands.   == venues == salsa dance socials are commonly held in night clubs  bars  ballrooms  restaurants  and outside  especially if part of an outdoor festival. salsa dancing is an international dance that can be found
in most metropolitan cities in the world. festivals are held annually  often called a salsa congress  in various host cities aimed to attract variety of salsa dancers from other cities and countries. the events bring dancers together to share their passion for the dance  build community  and to share moves and tips with each other. these events usually include salsa dance performers  live salsa music  workshops  open dancing  and contests.   == rhythm ==   salsa generally uses music suitable for dancing ranges from about 150 bpm (beats per minute) to around 250 bpm  although most dancing is done to music somewhere between 160–220 bpm. every salsa composition involves complex afro-cuban percussion based around the clave rhythm (which has four types)  though there can be moments when the clave is hidden for a while  often when quoting charanga  changüí and bomba. the key instrument that provides the core groove of a salsa song is the clave. it is often played with two wooden sticks (called clave) that are hit together. every instrument in a salsa band is either playing with the clave (generally  congas  timbales  piano  tres guitar  bongos  claves (instrument)  strings) or playing independent of the clave rhythm (generally  bass  maracas  güiro  cowbell). melodic components of the music and dancers can choose to be in clave or out of clave at any point. however it is taboo to play or dance to the wrong type of clave rhythm (see salsa music). while dancers can mark the clave rhythm directly  it is more common to do so indirectly (with  for example  a shoulder movement). this allows the dancing itself to look very fluent as if the rest of the body is just moving untouched with the legs.  for salsa  there are four types of clave rhythms  the 3-2 and 2-3 son claves being the most important  and the 3-2 and 2-3 rumba claves.  most salsa music is played with one of the son claves  though a rumba clave is occasionally used  especially during rumba sections of some songs.  as an example of how a clave fits within the 8 beats of a salsa dance  the beats of the 2-3 son clave are played on the counts of 2  3  5  the  and  of 6  and 8. there are other aspects outside the clave that help define salsa rhythm  the cowbell  the montuno rhythm and the tumbao rhythm. the cowbell rhythm emphasizes the  on-beats  of salsa  1  3  5 and 7 while the conga rhythm emphasizes the  off-beats  of the music  2  4  6  and 8. some dancers like to use the strong sound of the cowbell to stay on the salsa rhythm.  alternatively  others use the conga rhythm to create a jazzier feel to
their dance since strong  off-beats  are a jazz element. tumbao is the name of the rhythm that is played with the conga drums. it sounds like   cu  cum.. pa... cu  cum... pa . its most basic pattern is played on the beats 2  3  4  6  7 and 8.  tumbao rhythm is helpful for learning to dance contra-tiempo ( on2 ).  the beats 2 and 6 are emphasized when dancing on2  and the tumbao rhythm heavily emphasizes those beats as well. the montuno rhythm is a rhythm that is often played with a piano. the montuno rhythm loops over the 8 counts and is useful for finding the direction of the music. by listening to the same rhythm  that loops back to the beginning after eight counts  one can recognize which count is the first beat of the music. the basic salsa dance rhythm consists of taking three steps for every four beats of music.  the odd number of steps creates the inherent syncopation to the salsa dancing and ensures that it takes 8 beats of music to loop back to a new sequence of steps.   different styles employ this syncopation differently.  for  on1  dancers this rhythm is described as  quick  quick  quick  pause  quick  quick  quick  pause.   for  on2  dancers this rhythm is  quick  quick  slow  quick  quick  slow.   in all cases  only three steps are taken in each 4-beat measure (or 6 total over 8 beats).   == styles ==  salsa s roots are based on different cuban genres such as cuban son  specifically to the beat of son montuno in the 1920s. however  as it is a popular music  it is open to improvisation and thus it is continuously evolving. new modern salsa styles are associated and named to the original geographic areas that developed them. there are often devotees of each of these styles outside their home territory. characteristics that may identify a style include  timing  basic steps  foot patterns  body rolls and movements  turns and figures  attitude  dance influences and the way that partners hold each other. the point in a musical bar music where a slightly larger step is taken (the break step) and the direction the step moves can often be used to identify a style.   === afro-latino style === the afro-latino style is a very popular kind of salsa in the caribbean  puerto rico  dominican republic  haiti and cuba. it pretty much involves the same dancing as most versions of the salsa but has a little bit of twist added to it. the thing that separates it and gives it its own identity is that some of the songs tie in an african language and certain african instruments that gives the songs different rhythms. incorporating
other dance styling techniques into salsa dancing has become very common  for both men and women  shimmies  leg work  arm work  body movement  spins  body isolations  shoulder shimmies  rolls  even hand styling  acrobatics and lifts. latin american styles originate from puerto rico  cuba and surrounding caribbean islands including the dominican republic  and then expanding to venezuela  colombia  and the rest of latin america   also  there exists the  miami  style  which is a fusion of some cuban style elements with elements of various north american dances from the usa.   === colombian / cali style === cali-style salsa  also known as colombian salsa and salsa caleña  is based on geographical location of the colombian city of cali. cali is also known as the  capital de la salsa  (salsa s capital)  due to salsa music being the main genre in parties  nightclubs and festivals in the 21st century. the elements of cali-style salsa were strongly influenced by dances to caribbean rhythms which preceded salsa  such as pachanga and boogaloo.  cali has the most salsa schools and salsa teams in the world. many of the competitions are held in colombia.the central feature is the footwork which has quick rapid steps and skipping motions. colombian style does not execute cross-body leads or the  dile que no  as seen in other styles  but rather step in place and displace in closed position.  their footwork is intricate and precise  helping several colombian style dancers win major world championships. cali hosts many annual salsa events such as the world salsa cali festival and the encuentro de melomanos y coleccionistas.   === cuban style / casino ===  in cuba  a popular dance known as casino was marketed as cuban-style salsa or salsa cubana abroad to distinguish it from other salsa styles when the name was popularized in the 1970s. casino is popular in many places around the world  including in europe  latin america  north america  and even in some countries in the middle east such as israel. dancing casino is an expression of popular social culture  cubans consider casino as part of social and cultural activities centering on their popular music. the name casino is derived from the spanish term for the dance halls   casinos deportivos  where a lot of social dancing was done among the better-off  white cubans during the mid-20th century and onward. historically  casino traces its origin as a partner dance from cuban son  cha cha cha  danzón and guaracha. traditionally  casino is danced  a contratiempo . this means that  distinct from subsequent forms of salsa  no step is taken on the first and fifth beats in each clave pattern and the fourth and eighth beat are emphasised. in this way  rather than following a beat  the dancers themselves contribute in
their movement  to the polyrythmic pattern of the music. at the same time  it is often danced  a tiempo  although both  on3  (originally) and  on1  (nowadays). what gives the dance its life  however  is not its mechanical technique  but understanding and spontaneous use of the rich afro-cuban dance vocabulary within a  casino  dance. in the same way that a  sonero  (lead singer in son and salsa bands) will  quote  other  older songs in their own  a  casino  dancer will frequently improvise references to other dances  integrating movements  gestures and extended passages from the folkloric and popular heritage. this is particularly true of african descended cubans. such improvisations might include extracts of rumba  dances for african deities  the older popular dances such as cha cha chá and danzon as well as anything the dancer may feel.   ==== miami-style casino ==== developed by cuban immigrants to florida and centered on miami  this dance style is a fusion of some elements from casino with lots of elements from american culture and dances. the major difference of miami-style from other north american styles is the  atras  or  diagonal  back breaking steps performed backwards diagonally instead of moving forwards and backwards as seen in the new york style.  dancers do not shift their body weight greatly as seen in other styles. instead  dancers keep their upper body still  poised and relaxed while the feet execute endless intricacies. the dancer breaks mostly on1. a major difference of cali style and miami-style is that the latter is exclusively danced on the downbeat (on1) and has elements of shines and show-style added to it  following repertoires of north american styles. miami-style has many adherents  particularly cuban-americans and other latinos based in south florida.   ==== rueda de casino ====  in the 1950s salsa rueda or more accurately rueda de casino was developed in havana  cuba. pairs of dancers form a circle ( rueda  in spanish means  wheel )  with dance moves called out by one person. many of the moves involve rapidly swapping partners.  rueda de cuba  is original type of rueda  originating from cuba. it is not as formal as rueda de miami and consists of about 30 calls. it was codified in the 1970s. rueda de miami  originated in the 1980s from miami  is a formal style with many rules based on a mix  and is a hybridization of rueda de cuba & north american dance styles  with some routines reflecting american culture (e.g. coca-cola  dedo  adios) which is not found in the traditional cuban-style rueda.   === los angeles style ===  the los angeles salsa style (la style) is danced strictly on 1  in a slot \ line  using elements of various north american and stage dances. this helps prevent dancers
from hitting other couples on a crowded dance floor. it is strongly influenced by the latin hustle  swing  argentine tango  mambo dancers from mexico and latin ballroom dancing styles. la style places strong emphasis on sensuousness  theatricality and acrobatics. the lifts  stunts and aerial works of today s salsa shows are derived mostly from la style forms with origins in latin ballroom and ballet lifts.the two essential elements of this dance are the forward–backward basic step and the cross-body lead. in this pattern  the leader steps forward on 1  steps to the right on 2-3 while turning 90 degrees counter-clockwise (facing to the left)  leaving the slot open. the follower then steps straight forward on 5-6 and turns on 7-8  while the leader makes another 90 degrees counter-clockwise and slightly forward  coming back into the slot. in total  the couple turned 180° while the follower moved a distance (about 2meters).  rogelio moreno  francisco and luis vazquez are credited for the early development and growth of la style as well as albert torres  laura canellias and joe cassiniare. later dancers such as alex da silva  edie lewis  joby martinez and johnny vazquez are often credited with developing the la style of dancing as we know it today.   === new york style === new york style is danced in an ellipse or a  flat figure 8  on the floor  with the partners facing each other most of the time. unlike other styles of salsa  new york style is danced on the second beat of the music ( on 2 )  and the follower  not the leader  steps forward on the first measure of the music. the etiquette of new york style is strict about remaining in the close dance space  and avoiding dancing in a sandbox area with a lot of spins  turns and styling. there is greater emphasis on performing  shines  in which dancers separate themselves and dance solo with intricate footwork and styling for a time—a phenomenon that likely has origins from swing and new york tap. though he did not create new york style salsa  eddie torres is credited with popularizing it  and for having the follower step forward on the first beat of the first measure  followed by another step forward on the second beat to change direction (the  break step ). there are two distinct developments of new york salsa as a music and dance genre   primary evolution from mambo era was introduced to new york due to influx of migrating dissidents from all the caribbean and other latin migrants during pre/post cuban revolution in the 1950s and 1960s. this era is known as the  palladium era . at this time  the music and dance was called  mambo —connoting the general term without being specific. the most famous dancer during this era was puerto-rican descendant pedro  cuban pete  aguilar
 also known  the king of latin beat . secondary evolution during the late 1970s  latin puerto rican migrants  contributed a lot to the new york salsa development during the  nuyorican  era of héctor lavoe which greatly popularized salsa and modern latin music throughout the world. puerto rican salsa superstars were the most important musicians during the era  such as ray baretto ( the godfather ) and many others. there are also salsa artists that transcend both periods  notably the legendary puerto rican tito puente ( the mambo king ).these two developments create a fusion of a new salsa music and dance genre  different from its latin american and caribbean counterparts. new york style salsa emphasizes harmony with the percussive instruments in salsa music  such as the congas  timbales  and clave  since many or all of those instruments often mark the second beat in the music.   == see also == palladium ballroom – a new york city venue that helped popularize latin music and dance during the 1940s and 1950s rhumba – a ballroom dance that heavily influenced salsa salsa music world salsa championships cuban salsa   == references ==   == external links ==  salsa dancing in latin america travel guide from wikivoyage
the term rumba may refer to a variety of unrelated music styles. originally   rumba  was used as a synonym for  party  in northern cuba  and by the late 19th century it was used to denote the complex of secular music styles known as cuban rumba. since the early 20th century the term has been used in different countries to refer to distinct styles of music and dance  most of which are only tangentially related to the original cuban rumba  if at all. the vague etymological origin of the term rumba  as well as its interchangeable use with guaracha in settings such as bufo theatre  is largely responsible for such worldwide polysemy of the term. in addition   rumba  was the primary marketing term for cuban music in north america  as well as west and central africa  during much of the 20th century  before the rise of mambo  pachanga and salsa.  rumba  entered the english lexicon in the early 20th century  at least as early as 1919  and by 1932 it was used a verb to denote the ballroom dance. in this sense  the anglicised spelling  rhumba  became prevalent and is now recommended to distinguish it from traditional cuban rumba. also in the first third of the 20th century   rumba  entered the spanish flamenco world as a fast-paced palo (style) inspired in the cuban guaracha  and which gave rise to other forms of urban music now known as  rumba . throughout latin america   rumba  acquired different connotations  mostly referring to cubanized  danceable  local styles  such as colombian rumba criolla (creole rumba). at the same time   rumba  began to be used a catch-all term for afro-cuban music in most african countries  later giving rise to re-africanized cuban-based styles such as congolese rumba.   == in cuba ==  during the second half of the 19th century  several secular dance-oriented music styles were developed by afro-cuban workers in the poor neighbourhoods of havana and matanzas. these syncretic styles would later be referred to as  rumba  a word that also meant  party . traditionally  the three main styles of rumba are yambú  columbia and guaguancó  each of which has a characteristic dance  rhythm and singing. although still a purely folkloric genre  numerous innovations have been introduced in rumba since the mid 20th century  including new styles such as batá-rumba and guarapachangueo.   == in north america ==  in the us  the term  rhumba  (anglicised version of rumba)  began to be used during the 1920s to refer to ballroom music with afro-cuban music themes  particularly in the context of big band music. this music was mostly inspired by son cubano  while being rhythmically and instrumentally unrelated to cuban rumba. by the 1930s  with the release of  the
peanut vendor  the genre had become highly-successful and well-defined. the rhumba dance that developed on the east coast of the united states was based on the bolero-son. the first rumba competition took place in the savoy ballroom in 1930. nowadays  two different styles of ballroom rumba coexist  american-style and international-style. during the 1940s and 1950s  the mexican and american film industry expanded the use of the term rumba as rumbera films became popular. in this context  rumberas were cuban and mexican divas  singers and actresses who sang boleros and canciones  but rarely rumbas. notable rumberas include rita montaner  rosa carmina  maría antonieta pons and ninón sevilla.in the 1970s  with the emergence of salsa as a popular music and dance genre in the us  rhythmic elements of cuban rumba (particularly guaguancó) became prevalent alongside the son. like salsa  rhumba would then be danced to salsa ensembles instead of big bands. by the end of the 20th century  rhumba was also danced to pop music and jazz bands as seen in tv shows like dancing with the stars.   == in spain ==  in spain  the term rumba was introduced in the early 20th century as rumba flamenca  one of the palos (styles) of flamenco. particularly  it is considered one of the cantes de ida y vuelta  since flamenco itself might have had an influence on cuban rumba  particularly on its vocal style. however  musicologists agree that rumba flamenca does not truly derive from cuban rumba  but from guaracha  a fast-paced music style from havana. apart from rumba flamenca  other syncretic styles of afro-cuban origin have been named  rumba  throughout the iberian peninsula  outside of the context of flamenco (where the term cantes de ida y vuelta is mostly restricted)  such as the galician rumba. in the late 1950s  popular artists such as peret (el rey de la rumba) and el pescaílla developed an uptempo style that combined elements from rumba flamenca  spanish gypsy music and pop. this became known as catalan rumba (rumba catalana). in the 1980s  the style gained international popularity thanks to french ensemble gipsy kings. in the 1990s  the term “tecno-rumba” was used to describe the music of camela  and later azúcar moreno. since the early 2000s  the term rumba has been used in spain to refer to derivatives of catalan rumba with hip hop and rock elements  as recorded by estopa  huecco and melendi.   == in colombia == in the late 1930s and early 1940s  a fusion of bambuco and afro-cuban music was developed in colombia by artists such as emilio sierra  milciades garavito  and diógenes chaves pinzón  under the name rumba criolla (creole rumba). rumba criolla is classified into different regional styles such as rumba antioqueña and rumba tolimense.   == in africa ==  in the 1930s and 1940s  afro-cuban son groups such
as septeto habanero  trio matamoros and los guaracheros de oriente were played over radio congo belge in léopoldville (kinshasa)  gaining widespread popularity in the country during the following decades. their recordings were also made available to the public as part of the g.v. series of 10  singles released by his master s voice throughout africa. once local bands tried to emulate the sound of cuban son (incorrectly referred to as  rumba  in africa  despite being unrelated to cuban rumba)  their music became known as congolese rumba or rumba lingala. by the late 1960s  congolese rumba was an established genre in most of central africa  and it would also impact the music of west and east africa. franco s ok jazz and le grand kallé s african jazz were amongst the most successful congolese rumba ensembles of the 20th century. a faster subgenre known as soukous (from the french word secouer   to shake ) was developed in the late 1960s by bands such as african fiesta and is often used as a synonym of the former.   == references ==
belly dance  also referred to as arabic dance (arabic  رقص شرقي‎  romanized  raqs sharqi  literally   oriental dancing ) is an expressionist type of dance that originated in egypt and that emphasizes complex movements of the torso. it has evolved to take many different forms depending on the country and region  both in costume and dance style.   == names and terminology ==  belly dance  is a translation of the french term danse du ventre  which was coined in 1864 as a snide nickname for the orientalist painting the dance of the almeh by french artist jean-léon gérôme.the painting depicts a woman dancing before an audience of seated soldiers in a fantasy middle eastern setting. the dancer s costume  with its small vest and gauzy blouse  seems to have been inspired by contemporary awalem (egyptian slang for dancers) women s clothing. where the awalem woman of the period would have worn an elbow-length blouse tucked in to her skirt at the waist  however  this dancer s sheer blouse is open over her bare breasts and her nude abdomen is thrust toward the viewer of the painting.  over time  danse du ventre came to be used in french for all solo  torso-articulated dances of middle eastern origin. the english translation  belly dance  seems to have made its first appearance in 1889 in reference to the egyptian dancers who performed at the exposition universelle that was held in paris that year.the informal  social form of the dance is known as raqs baladi ( dance of the country  or  folk dance ) in egyptian arabic and is considered an indigenous dance. raqs sharqi ( eastern dance ) is a broad category of professional forms of the dance  including forms of belly dance as we know it today  such as raqs baladi  sa idi  ghawazee and awalim.    belly dance is primarily a torso-driven dance  with an emphasis on articulations of the hips. unlike many western dance forms  the focus of the dance is on isolations of the torso muscles  rather than on movements of the limbs through space. although some of these isolations appear similar to the isolations used in jazz ballet  they are sometimes driven differently and have a different feeling or emphasis. in common with most folk dances  there is no universal naming scheme for belly dance movements. some dancers and dance schools have developed their own naming schemes  but none of these is universally recognized. one of the most common naming schemes is that of the salimpour format  introduced by suhaila and jamila salimpour. jamila salimpour was the first to coin many now-popular names of belly dance moves  including steps such as the basic egyptian  choo choo  maya  and turkish drop. but these commonly-held terms are the exception  rather than the rule  in the belly dance world.   ===
movements found in belly dance === many of the movements characteristic of belly dance can be grouped into the following categories  percussive movements  staccato movements  most commonly of the hips  used to punctuate the music or accent a beat. typical movements in this group include hip drops  vertical hip rocks  outwards hip hits  hip lifts and hip twists. percussive movements using other parts of the body can include lifts or drops of the ribcage and shoulder accents. fluid movements  flowing  sinuous movements in which the body is in continuous motion  used to interpret melodic lines and lyrical sections in the music  or modulated to express complex instrumental improvisations. these movements require a great deal of abdominal muscle control. typical movements include horizontal and vertical figures of 8 or infinity loops with the hips  horizontal or tilting hip circles  and undulations of the hips and abdomen. these basic shapes may be varied  combined and embellished to create an infinite variety of complex  textured movements. shimmies  shivers and vibrations  small  fast  continuous movements of the hips or ribcage  which create an impression of texture and depth of movement. shimmies are commonly layered over other movements  and are often used to interpret rolls on the tablah or riq or fast strumming of the oud or qanun (instrument). there are many types of shimmy  varying in size and method of generation. some common shimmies include relaxed  up and down hip shimmies  straight-legged knee-driven shimmies  fast  tiny hip vibrations  twisting hip shimmies  bouncing  earthquake  shimmies  and relaxed shoulder or ribcage shimmies.in addition to these torso movements  dancers in many styles will use level changes  travelling steps  turns and spins. the arms are used to frame and accentuate movements of the hips  for dramatic gestures  and to create beautiful lines and shapes with the body  particularly in the more balletic  westernised styles. other movements may be used as occasional accents  such as low kicks and arabesques  backbends  and head tosses.   == in the middle east ==   === origins and history === belly dancing is believed to have had a long history in the middle east  but reliable evidence about its origins is scarce  and accounts of its history are often highly speculative.  several greek and roman sources including juvenal and martial describe dancers from asia minor and spain using undulating movements  playing castanets  and sinking to the floor with  quivering thighs  descriptions that are certainly suggestive of the movements that are today associated with belly dance. later  particularly in the 18th and 19th centuries  european travellers in the middle east such as edward lane and flaubert wrote extensively of the dancers they saw there  including the awalim and ghawazee of egypt. in the ottoman empire belly dance was performed by both boys and
women in the sultan s palace.   === social context ===  belly dance in the middle east has two distinct social contexts  as a folk or social dance  and as a performance art. as a social dance  belly dance (also called raqs baladi or raqs shaabi in this context) is performed at celebrations and social gatherings by ordinary people (male and female  young and old)  in their ordinary clothes. in more conservative or traditional societies  these events may be gender segregated  with separate parties where men and women dance separately.historically  professional dance performers were the awalim (primarily musicians and poets)  ghawazi  and köçekler. the maazin sisters may have been the last authentic performers of ghawazi dance in egypt  with khayreyya maazin still teaching and performing as of 2009.in the modern era  professional performers (including dancers  singers  and actors) are not considered to be respectable in more conservative middle eastern countries  and there is a strong social stigma attached to female performers in particular  since they display their bodies in public  which is considered haram in islam. however  in lebanon  turkey  and morocco  the art is still celebrated and performed.   === in egypt ===  many bellydancers work in cairo. the modern egyptian belly dance style (and the modern costume) are said to have originated in cairo s nightclubs. many of the local dancers went on to appear in egyptian films and had a great influence on the development of the egyptian style and became famous  like samia gamal and taheyya kariokka  both of whom helped attract eyes to egyptian style worldwide.egyptian belly dance is noted for its controlled  precise movements.   === in turkey === turkish belly dance is referred to in turkey as oryantal dans  or simply  oryantal . the turkish style of belly dance is lively and playful  with a greater outward projection of energy than the more contained and artistic egyptian style. turkish dancers are known for their energetic  athletic (even gymnastic) style  and their adept use of finger cymbals  also known as zils  which are commonly used in egyptian style and movies.  connoisseurs of turkish style often say a dancer who cannot play the zils is not an accomplished dancer. floorwork  which has been banned in egypt since the mid-20th century  is still an important part of turkish belly dance. another distinguishing element of turkish style is the use of a 98 rhythm  divided as 2+2+2+3  often referred to as the karsilama rhythm. karşilama  in turkish dance  is not a rhythm but a folk dance performed in a line  whereas a 98 (dokuz sekiz) rhythm defines the count of the rhythm and is used in both karşilama and roman havasi. many professional dancers and musicians in turkey continue to be of romani heritage  and the roma people of turkey have had a strong
influence on the turkish style.   === in lebanon === lebanese style belly dance is somewhere between the egyptian and turkish styles. lebanese dance takes from the classic oriental dance  but still incorporates a feisty  modern edge. there are large steps  backward leans to the torso  twisting hip rotations  large and busy arms and lots of shimmies. the types of techniques that are used in lebanese style dance are quick layered shimmies and subtle internal movements.  lebanese dancers sometimes include kicks  splits  deep back bends  and turkish drops.   == outside the middle east == belly dance was popularized in the west during the romantic movement of the 18th and 19th centuries  when orientalist artists depicted romanticized images of harem life in the ottoman empire.   === in north america ===  although there were dancers of this type at the 1876 centennial in philadelphia  it was not until the 1893 chicago world s fair that it gained national attention. the term  belly dancing  is often credited to sol bloom  the fair s entertainment director  but he referred to the dance as danse du ventre  the name used by the french in algeria. in his memoirs  bloom states   when the public learned that the literal translation was  belly dance  they delightedly concluded that it must be salacious and immoral ... i had a gold mine.  authentic dancers from several middle eastern and north african countries performed at the fair  including syria  turkey and algeria—but it was the dancers in the egyptian theater of the street in the cairo exhibit who gained the most notoriety.  the fact that the dancers were uncorseted and gyrated their hips was shocking to victorian sensibilities.  there were no soloists  but it is claimed that a dancer nicknamed little egypt stole the show. some claim the dancer was farida mazar spyropoulos  but this fact is disputed.the popularity of these dancers subsequently spawned dozens of imitators  many of whom claimed to be from the original troupe. victorian society continued to be affronted by the dance  and dancers were sometimes arrested and fined. the dance was nicknamed the  hoochie coochie  or the shimmy and shake. a short film   fatima s dance  was widely distributed in the nickelodeon theaters. it drew criticism for its  immodest  dancing  and was eventually censored. belly dance drew men in droves to burlesque theaters  and to carnival and circus lots. thomas edison made several films of dancers in the 1890s.  these included a turkish dance  and crissie sheridan in 1897  and princess rajah from 1904  which features a dancer playing zills  doing  floor work  and balancing a chair in her teeth. ruth st. denis also used middle eastern-inspired dance in d. w. griffith s silent film intolerance  her goal being to lift dance to a respectable
art form at a time when dancers were considered to be women of loose morals. hollywood began producing films such as the sheik  cleopatra  and salomé  to capitalize on western fantasies of the orient. when immigrants from arab states began to arrive in new york in the 1930s  dancers started to perform in nightclubs and restaurants.  in the late 1960s and early  70s many dancers began teaching. middle eastern or eastern bands took dancers with them on tour  which helped spark interest in the dance. although using turkish and egyptian movements and music  american cabaret ( amcab ) belly dancing has developed its own distinctive style  using props and encouraging audience interaction. in 1987  a distinctively american style of group improvisational dance  american tribal style belly dance  (ats)  was created.  although a unique and wholly modern style  its steps are based on existing dance techniques  including those from north india  the middle east  and africa.   many forms of  tribal fusion  belly dance have also developed  incorporating elements from many other dance and music styles including flamenco  ballet  burlesque  hula hoop and even hip hop.  gothic belly dance  is a style which incorporates elements from goth subculture.   === in spain === belly dancers are thought to have come to spain from lebanon in the time of the phoenicians (11th century bc to 5th century bc). when arab family of the umayyad came to spain  they sent basque singers and dancers to damascus and egypt for training in the middle eastern style. these dancers came to be known as al-andalus dancers. it is theorised that the fusion of the al-andalus style with the dances of the gypsies led to the creation of flamenco.   === in australia === the first wave of interest in belly dancing in australia was during the late 1970s to 1980s with the influx of migrants and refugees escaping troubles in the middle east  including drummer jamal zraika.  these immigrants created a social scene including numerous lebanese and turkish restaurants  providing employment for belly dancers. rozeta ahalyea is widely regarded as the  mother  of australian belly dance  training early dance pioneers such as amera eid and terezka drnzik. belly dance has now spread across the country  with belly dance communities in every capital city and many regional centres.   === in the united kingdom === belly dance has been in evidence in the uk since the early 1960s. during the 1970s and 1980s  there was a thriving arabic club scene in london  with live arabic music and belly dancing a regular feature  but the last of these closed in the early 1990s. several prominent members of the british belly dance community began their dance careers working in these clubs. today  there are fewer traditional venues for arabic dance in the uk  however  there is
a large amateur belly dance community.  several international belly dance festivals are now held in britain. in addition  there are a growing number of competitions  which have increased in popularity in recent years. the uk belly dance scene leans strongly towards the egyptian/arabic style  with little turkish influence. american tribal style and tribal fusion belly dance are also popular.   == costume == the costume most commonly associated with belly dance is the  bedlah  (arabic  بدلة‎  literally  suit ) style  which typically includes a fitted top or bra  a fitted hip belt  and a full-length skirt or harem pants. the bra and belt may be richly decorated with beads  sequins  crystals  coins  beaded fringe and embroidery. the belt may be a separate piece  or sewn into a skirt. badia masabni  a cairo cabaret owner during the early 20th century  is credited with creating the modern bedlah style. it has been suggested that the bedlah was inspired by glamorous hollywood costuming  or created to appeal to western visitors.  earlier costumes were made up of a full skirt  light chemise and tight cropped vest with heavy embellishments and jewelry. as well as the two-piece bedlah costume  full length dresses are sometimes worn  especially when dancing more earthy baladi styles. dresses range from closely fitting  highly decorated gowns  which often feature heavy embellishments and mesh-covered cutouts  to simpler designs which are often based on traditional clothing.   === costume in egypt === in egypt dancers wear a bedlah. alternatively  they may wear a dress with mesh-filled cutouts. egypt has laws in place regarding what dancers can and cannot wear  and according to act no. 430 of the law on the censorship of literary works  dancers must cover their lower bodies  including the breast and stomach area. typically a sheer  skin-colored mesh fabric covering the stomach is enough. many dancers in cairo ignore these rules  as they are rarely enforced and the consequences for performing with a bare belly may simply be a fine. however  there have been multiple incidents of foreign belly dancers being arrested over their costumes.   === costume in lebanon === as there is no prohibition on showing the abdomen in lebanon  the bedlah style is more common. the skirts tend to be more sheer than egyptian outfits  showing more of the dancer s body. the veil is more widely used than in egypt. high heels are commonly worn. lebanese dancers have more freedom than egyptian style dancers in the type of costume they choose to wear.   === costume in turkey === turkish costumes are usually in the bedlah style. distinctive features of many turkish costumes include a v-shaped or triangular belt which may be shaped or contoured around the top edge  and a great deal of embellishment and beaded fringing on both the bra and the belt. skirts are
often fuller than their egyptian counterparts  and are likely to be made of chiffon or velvet rather than lycra. in the 1980s and  90s a very revealing costume style developed with skirts designed to display both legs up to the hip  and plunging bras or even pasties. such styles still exist in some venues but there are also many turkish belly dancers who wear more moderate costumes. even so  many turkish belly dance costumes reflect the playful  flirty style of turkish belly dance.   === tribal style costumes ===  tribal belly dance costumes draw inspiration from traditional folkloric costumes across the globe and include circle skirts  pantaloons  and turbans or headdresses decked with feathers or flowers.   == health == belly dance is a non-impact  weight-bearing exercise and is thus suitable for all ages. many of the moves involve isolations  which improves flexibility of the torso. belly dance moves are beneficial to the spine  as the full-body undulation moves lengthen (decompress) and strengthen the entire column of spinal and abdominal muscles in a gentle way. dancing with a veil can help build strength in the upper body  arm and shoulders. playing the zills trains fingers to work independently and builds strength. the legs and long muscles of the back are strengthened by hip movements.   == notable practitioners == professional belly dancers include    == in popular culture == the titular character of the shantae series of video games developed by wayforward technologies is a belly dancing  half-genie  who uses magical belly dances to transform into various animals. the brazilian telenovela o clone (also known as el clon in spanish-speaking countries and the united states) is set in brazil and morocco and featured belly dancing in many episodes. the lead character  jade (giovanna antonelli)  used it to entice her lover lucas (murilo benício) and to soothe and seduce her husband said (dalton vigh). several james bond films (including from russia with love) and music videos have featured belly dancers. in the man with the golden gun  the belly dancer saida wears a spent bullet in her navel  which bond accidentally swallows while trying to retrieve it. documentaries about belly dance include american bellydancer  journey of desire  a foreign dancer in cairo  belly  sensual... scarred... sacred  and bellydancers of cairo.   == see also == raqs sharqi baladi ghawazi almeh köçek persian dance american tribal style belly dance improv tribal style belly dance tribal fusion m alayah glossary of belly dance terms   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to raqs sharqi at wikimedia commons top dance styles around the world
flamenco (spanish pronunciation  [flaˈmeŋko])  in its strictest sense  is a professionalized art-form based on the various folkloric music traditions of southern spain in the autonomous community of andalusia. in a wider sense  the term refers to a variety of spanish musical styles developed as early as the 19th century. the oldest record of flamenco dates to 1774 in the book las cartas marruecas by josé cadalso (akombo 2016  240–241). flamenco has been influenced by and associated with the romani people in spain  however  its origin and style are uniquely andalusian (hayes 2009  31–37).the origin of flamenco is a subject of disagreement. of the hypotheses regarding its origin  the most widespread states that flamenco was developed through the cross-cultural interchange between native andalusians  romani  castilians  moors and sephardi jews that occurred in andalusia (machin-autenrieth 2015 ). the early 20th century poet and dramatist federico garcía lorca wrote that the presence of flamenco in andalusia significantly predates the arrival of romani people to the region. the diccionario de la lengua española (dictionary of the spanish language) primarily attributes the creation of the style to the spanish romani.flamenco has become popular all over the world  especially the united states and japan. in japan  there are more flamenco academies than there are in spain.on november 16  2010  unesco declared flamenco one of the masterpieces of the oral and intangible heritage of humanity (anon. 2010).   == etymology == there are many suggestions for the origin of the word flamenco as a musical term  but no solid evidence for any of them. the word is spanish for  flemish  (meaning  native of flanders  a one-time spanish possession). the word was not recorded as a musical and dance term until the late 18th century  in the book las cartas marruecas by josé cadalso (1774) (akombo 2016  240–241). one theory  proposed by andalusian historian and nationalist blas infante  suggested that the word is derived from the hispano-arabic term fellah mengu  meaning  expelled peasant  referring to the andalusians of islamic faith and the remaining moriscos who fled with the roma newcomers.another theory is that the spanish word flamenco is a derivative of the spanish word  meaning  fire  or  flame .  the word flamenco may have been used for fiery behaviour  which could have come to be applied to the gitano players and performers (ruiz 2007  165ff).   == palos ==  palos (formerly known as cantes) are flamenco styles  classified by criteria such as rhythmic pattern  mode  chord progression  stanzaic form and geographic origin. there are over 50 different palos  some are sung unaccompanied while others have guitar or other accompaniment. some forms are danced while others are not. some are reserved for men and others for women while some may be performed by either  though these traditional distinctions are breaking down  the farruca  for example
 once a male dance  is now commonly performed by women too. there are many ways to categorize palos but they traditionally fall into three classes  the most serious is known as cante jondo (or cante grande)  while lighter  frivolous forms are called cante chico. forms that do not fit either category are classed as cante intermedio.  these are the best known palos  alegrías bulerías bulerías por soleá (soleá por bulerías) caracoles cartageneras fandango fandango de huelva fandango malagueño farruca granaínas guajiras malagueñas martinete mineras peteneras rondeñas saeta seguiriyas soleá tangos tanguillos tarantos tientos villancicos   == music ==   === structure === a typical flamenco recital with voice and guitar accompaniment  comprises a series of pieces (not exactly  songs ) in different palos. each song is a set of verses (called copla  tercio  or letras)  punctuated by guitar interludes (falsetas). the guitarist also provides a short introduction setting the tonality  compás (see below) and tempo of the cante (manuel 2006  98). in some palos  these falsetas are played with a specific structure too  for example  the typical sevillanas is played in an aab pattern  where a and b are the same falseta with only a slight difference in the ending (martin 2002  48).   === harmony === flamenco uses the flamenco mode (which can also be described as the modern phrygian mode (modo frigio)  or a harmonic version of that scale with a major 3rd degree)  in addition to the major and minor scales commonly used in modern western music. the phrygian mode occurs in palos such as soleá  most bulerías  siguiriyas  tangos and tientos.  a typical chord sequence  usually called the  andalusian cadence  may be viewed as in a modified phrygian  in e the sequence is am–g–f–e (manuel 2006  96). according to manolo sanlúcar e is here the tonic  f has the harmonic function of dominant while am and g assume the functions of subdominant and mediant respectively.guitarists tend to use only two basic inversions or  chord shapes  for the tonic chord (music)  the open 1st inversion e and the open 3rd inversion a  though they often transpose these by using a capo. modern guitarists such as ramón montoya  have introduced other positions  montoya himself started to use other chords for the tonic in the modern dorian sections of several palos  f♯ for tarantas  b for granaínas and a♭ for the minera. montoya also created a new palo as a solo for guitar  the rondeña in c♯ with scordatura. later guitarists have further extended the repertoire of tonalities  chord positions and scordatura. there are also palos in major mode  most cantiñas and alegrías  guajiras  some bulerías and tonás  and the cabales (a major type of siguiriyas). the minor mode is restricted to the farruca  the milongas (among cantes de ida y vuelta)
 and some styles of tangos  bulerías  etc. in general traditional palos in major and minor mode are limited harmonically to two-chord (tonic–dominant) or three-chord (tonic–subdominant–dominant) progressions (rossy 1998  92). however modern guitarists have introduced chord substitution  transition chords  and even modulation. fandangos and derivative palos such as malagueñas  tarantas and cartageneras are bimodal  guitar introductions are in phrygian mode while the singing develops in major mode  modulating to phrygian at the end of the stanza (rossy 1998  92).   === melody === dionisio preciado  quoted by sabas de hoces (1982 )  established the following characteristics for the melodies of flamenco singing   microtonality  presence of intervals smaller than the semitone. portamento  frequently  the change from one note to another is done in a smooth transition  rather than using discrete intervals. short tessitura or range  most traditional flamenco songs are limited to a range of a sixth (four tones and a half). the impression of vocal effort is the result of using different timbres  and variety is accomplished by the use of microtones. use of enharmonic scale. while in equal temperament scales  enharmonics are notes with identical pitch but different spellings (e.g. a♭ and g♯)  in flamenco  as in unequal temperament scales  there is a microtonal intervalic difference between enharmonic notes. insistence on a note and its contiguous chromatic notes (also frequent in the guitar)  producing a sense of urgency. baroque ornamentation  with an expressive  rather than merely aesthetic function. apparent lack of regular rhythm  especially in the siguiriyas  the melodic rhythm of the sung line is different from the metric rhythm of the accompaniment. most styles express sad and bitter feelings. melodic improvisation  flamenco singing is not  strictly speaking  improvised  but based on a relatively small number of traditional songs  singers add variations on the spur of the moment.musicologist hipólito rossy adds the following characteristics (rossy 1998  97)   flamenco melodies are characterized by a descending tendency  as opposed to  for example  a typical opera aria  they usually go from the higher pitches to the lower ones  and from forte to piano  as was usual in ancient greek scales. in many styles  such as soleá or siguiriya  the melody tends to proceed in contiguous degrees of the scale. skips of a third or a fourth are rarer. however  in fandangos and fandango-derived styles  fourths and sixths can often be found  especially at the beginning of each line of verse. according to rossy  this is proof of the more recent creation of this type of songs  influenced by castilian jota.   === compás === compás is the spanish word for metre or time signature (in classical music theory). it also refers to the rhythmic cycle  or layout  of a palo. the compás is fundamental to flamenco. compás is most often translated
as rhythm but it demands far more precise interpretation than any other western style of music. if there is no guitarist available  the compás is rendered through hand clapping (palmas) or by hitting a table with the knuckles. the guitarist uses techniques like strumming (rasgueado) or tapping the soundboard (golpe). changes of chords emphasize the most important downbeats. flamenco uses three basic counts or measures  binary  ternary and a form of a twelve-beat cycle that is unique to flamenco. there are also free-form styles including  among others  the tonás  saetas  malagueñas  tarantos  and some types of fandangos.  rhythms in 24 or 44. these metres are used in forms like tangos  tientos  gypsy rumba  zambra and tanguillos. rhythms in 34. these are typical of fandangos and sevillanas  suggesting their origin as non-roma styles  since the 34 and 44 measures are not common in ethnic roma music. 12-beat rhythms usually rendered in amalgams of 68 + 34 and sometimes 128. the 12-beat cycle is the most common in flamenco  differentiated by the accentuation of the beats in different palos. the accents do not correspond to the classic concept of the downbeat. the alternating of groups of 2 and 3 beats is also common in spanish folk dances of the 16th century such as the zarabanda  jácara and canarios.there are three types of 12-beat rhythms  which vary in their layouts  or use of accentuations  soleá  seguiriya and bulería.  peteneras and guajiras  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12. both palos start with the strong accent on 12. hence the meter is  12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11... the seguiriya  liviana  serrana  toná liviana  cabales  121 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12. soleá  within the cantiñas group of palos which includes the alegrías  cantiñas  mirabras  romera  caracoles and soleá por bulería (also  bulería por soleá )  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12. for practical reasons  when transferring flamenco guitar music to sheet music  this rhythm is written as a regular 34.the bulerías is the emblematic palo of flamenco  today its 12-beat cycle is most often played with accents on the 3rd  6th  8th  10th and 12th beats. the accompanying palmas are played in groups of 6 beats  giving rise to a multitude of counter-rhythms and percussive voices within the 12 beat compás.  in certain regions like  xerez  spain  the rhythm stays in a simpler six-count rhythm  only including the twelve count in a musical resolve.   == forms of flamenco expression ==   === toque (guitar) ===  the origins  history and importance of the flamenco guitar is covered in the main wikipedia entry for the flamenco guitar.   === cante (song)
===  the origins  history and importance of the cante is covered in the main wikipedia entry for the cante flamenco.   === baile (dance) === el baile flamenco is known for its emotional intensity  proud carriage  expressive use of the arms and rhythmic stamping of the feet  unlike tap dance or irish dance which use different techniques. as with any dance form  many different styles of flamenco have developed. in the twentieth century  flamenco danced informally at gitano (roma) celebrations in spain was considered the most  authentic  form of flamenco. there was less virtuoso technique in gitano flamenco  but the music and steps are fundamentally the same. the arms are noticeably different from classical flamenco  curving around the head and body rather than extending  often with a bent elbow.   flamenco puro  otherwise known as “flamenco por derecho” is considered the form of performance flamenco closest to its gitano influences. in this style  the dance is often performed solo  and is based on signals and calls of structural improvisation rather than choreographed. in the improvisational style  castanets are not often used.   classical flamenco  is the style most frequently performed by spanish flamenco dance companies. it is danced largely in a proud and upright style. for women  the back is often held in a marked back bend. unlike the more gitano influenced styles  there is little movement of the hips  the body is tightly held and the arms are long  like a ballet dancer. in fact many of the dancers in these companies are trained in ballet clásico español more than in the improvisational language of flamenco. flamenco has both influenced and been influenced by ballet clásico español  as evidenced by the fusion of the two ballets created by  la argentinita  in the early part of the twentieth century and later  by joaquín cortés  eventually by the entire ballet nacional de españa et al. in the 1950s jose greco was one of the most famous male flamenco dancers  performing on stage worldwide and on television including the ed sullivan show  and reviving the art almost singlehandedly.  greco’s company left a handful of prominent pioneers  most notably  maria benitez and vicente romero of new mexico.  today  there are many centers of flamenco art.  albuquerque  new mexico is considered the “center of the nation” for flamenco art. much of this is due to maria benitez’s 37 years of sold-out summer seasons. albuquerque boasts three distinct prominent centers  national institute of flamenco  casa flamenca and flamenco works. each center dedicates time to daily training  cultural diffusion and world-class performance equaled only to world-class performances one would find in the heart of southern spain  andalucía. modern flamenco is a highly technical dance style requiring years of study. the emphasis for both male and female performers is on lightning-fast footwork performed with absolute precision. in
addition  the dancer may have to dance while using props such as castanets  canes  shawls and fans.  flamenco nuevo  is a recent marketing phenomenon in flamenco. marketed as a “newer version” of flamenco  it’s roots came from world-music promoters trying to sell albums for artists who created music that “sounded like” or had spanish-style influences.  though some of this music was played in similar pitches  scales and was well-received  it has little to nothing to do with the art of flamenco guitar  dance  cante jondo or the improvisational language.  “nuevo flamenco” consists largely of compositions and repertoire  while traditional flamenco music and dance is a language composed of stanzas  actuated by oral formulaic calls and signals.  the flamenco most foreigners are familiar with is a style that was developed as a spectacle for tourists. to add variety  group dances are included and even solos are more likely to be choreographed. the frilly  voluminous spotted dresses are derived from a style of dress worn for the sevillanas at the annual feria in seville. in traditional flamenco  only the very young or older dancers are considered to have the emotional innocence or maturity to adequately convey the duende (soul) of the genre (anon. n.d.). therefore  unlike other dance forms  where dancers turn professional through techniques early on to take advantage of youth and strength  many flamenco dancers do not hit their peak until their thirties and will continue to perform into their fifties and beyond.  one artist that is considered a young master is juan manuel fernandez montoya  otherwise known as “farruquito.”  at age 12  farruquito was considered a pioneer and for “flamenco puro ” or “flamenco por derecho ” because of his emotional depth.             scenes of flamenco performance in seville.            == see also ==   == references ==   == sources == akombo  david (2016). the unity of music and dance in world cultures. north carolina  mcfarland books. isbn 978-0786497157.. álvarez caballero  ángel  el cante flamenco  alianza editorial  madrid  second edition  1998. isbn 84-206-9682-x (first edition  1994) álvarez caballero  ángel  la discografía ideal del cante flamenco  planeta  barcelona  1995. isbn 84-08-01602-4 anon. 2010.  el flamenco es declarado patrimonio cultural inmaterial de la humanidad por la unesco  yahoo noticias  16 de noviembre de 2010 (accessed 16 november 2010). arredondo pérez  herminia  and francisco j. garcía gallardo     música flamenca. nuevos artistas  antiguas tradiciones  in andalucía en la música. expresión de comunidad  construcción de identidad  edited by francisco j. garcía y herminia arredondo. sevilla  centro de estudios andaluces  2014  pp. 225–242. isbn 978-84-942332-0-3 banzi  julia lynn (ph.d.)    flamenco guitar innovation and the
circumscription of tradition  2007  382 pages  aat 328581  dai-a 68/10  university of california  santa barbara. caba landa  pedro  and carlos caba landa. andalucía  su comunismo y su cante jondo. 1ª ed editorial atlántico 1933. 3ª edición  editorial renacimiento 2008. isbn 978-84-8472-348-6 coelho  víctor anand (editor)   flamenco guitar  history  style  and context  in the cambridge companion to the guitar  cambridge university press  2003  pp. 13–32. hayes  michelle heffner (2009). flamenco  conflicting histories of the dance. north carolina  mcfarland books. isbn 978-0786439232. hoces bonavilla  sabas de. n.d.  acotaciones sobre algunos conceptos errados con el flamenco (1) . funjdiaz.net. retrieved 2019-10-22. revista de folklore  no. 23 147–157 (archive from 24 september 2015). machin-autenrieth  matthew (2015).  flamenco ¿algo nuestro  (something of ours )  music  regionalism and political geography in andalusia  spain . ethnomusicology forum. 24 (1 (april))  4–27. doi 10.1080/17411912.2014.966852. mairena  antonio  and ricardo molina. mundo y formas del cante flamenco  librería al-ándalus  third edition  1979 (first edition  revista de occidente  1963) martin  juan (2002). solo flamenco guitar. mel bay publications. p. 48. isbn 978-0-7866-6458-0. martín salazar  jorge  los cantes flamencos  diputación provincial de granada  granada  1991 isbn 84-7807-041-9 manuel  peter.  flamenco in focus  an analysis of a performance of soleares.  in analytical studies in world music  edited by michael tenzer. new york  oxford university press  2006  pp. 92–119. ortiz nuevo  josé luis  alegato contra la pureza  libros pm  barcelona  1996. isbn 84-88944-07-1 ríos ruiz  manuel. ayer y hoy del cante flamenco  ediciones istmo  tres cantos (madrid)  1997  isbn 84-7090-311-x. rossy  hipólito  teoría del cante jondo  cresda  barcelona  1998. isbn 84-7056-354-8 (first edition  1966) ruiz  ana (2007). vibrant andalusia  the spice of life in southern spain. algora. isbn 978-0-87586-540-9.   == external links ==  flamenco show in seville
latin dance is a general label  and a term in partner dance competition jargon. it refers to types of ballroom dance and folk dance that (with few exceptions) originated in latin america. the category of latin dances in the international dancesport competitions consists of the cha-cha-cha  rumba  samba  paso doble  and also the jive of united states origin.social latin dances (street latin) include salsa  mambo  merengue  rumba  bachata  bomba and plena. there are many dances which were popular in the first part of the 20th century  but which are now of only historical interest. the cuban danzón is a good example.perreo is a puerto rican dance associated with reggaeton music with jamaican and caribbean influences. escondido and zamba. typical bolivian folk dances are the morenada  kullawada  caporales and the recently created tinku. in colombia one of the typical dances is the cumbia.   == origin == latin dance is mainly derived from three styles  native american  european  and african influences. the roots of latin dance are deep and geographically embedded because it dates back to the fifteenth century when indigenous dances were first recorded by europeans.its influence was first derived from their native roots  the aztecs and incas. when sixteenth century seagoing explorers returned home to portugal and spain  they brought along tales of the native peoples. according to rachel hanson  no one knows how long these dance traditions were established  but they were already being developed and ritualized when they were observed by the europeans. this suggests that these native influences became the foundation for latin dancing. indigenous dance often told stories of everyday activities such as hunting  agriculture  or astronomy.  when european settlers and conquistadors began to colonize south america in the early sixteenth century  they reinvented the local dance traditions  but still kept the styles of the natives. catholic settlers merged the native culture with their own and incorporated catholic saints and stories to the dance. the europeans were captivated by the highly structured  large member dance working together in a precise manner. it was not until the integration of european styles that modern latin dancing became its true form.after the europeans brought home the aztec/inca influences in the sixteenth century  they incorporated their own styles to the dance. since the aztec/inca dances were performed in a group  many of the european dances were performed by a male and female. this was a new practice because european dances prohibited male and female dance partners from touching each other. the benefits of such dance style allowed musical appreciation and social integration  which became the form of latin dance. however  “much of the storytelling element disappeared from the genre as the focus moved toward the rhythm and steps ” hanson explains. the movement evolved differently because it brought a certain element of daintiness to the aztec dances since the steps were smaller and the movements were less forceful. combining african
styles along with the native and european influences is what truly makes latin dance unique.the movement and rhythms of african influences left a permanent mark in latin dance. when the african slaves entered europe in the 1500s  they brought styles such as basic  simple movements (putting emphasis on the upper body  torso  or feet) and intricate movements like the coordination of different body parts and complex actions such as “fast rotation  ripples of the body  and contraction and release  as well as variations in dynamics  levels  and use of space.” the difference between the african and european styles was that it included bent knees and a downward focus (grounded to the earth) rather than a straight-backed upward focus like the europeans  and whole-foot steps than toes and heels. such influences of african roots allowed the beauty and uniqueness of latin dance.   == development == many dance styles from different areas of the world were integrated into latin dance. such styles came about which comprised the main categories of latin dancing  salsa  mambo  merengue  rumba  cha cha cha  bachata  and samba. music became the engine for latin dancing because it guided the dance steps with its measure  speed  and the feeling it evoked  from energetic to sensual. various latin american regions developed independent styles  and from each genre  or combination of styles  a different genre was born. for example  the mambo which was created in the 1940s emerged through the combination of american swing and cuban son music.   == the modernization of latin dance == following the music  movement history  and the rhythms  latin dance evolved over time and individual steps slowly shifted the repertoire of each dance. it has several different forms and many modernized styles which creates a problem because it is shifting away from its native  european  and african roots. a popular aerobic dance class known as zumba is said to be influenced by latin rhythm and steps. however  there are disagreements among latin dancers about whether zumba is true latin dance. one skeptic is darlin garcia  salsa dancer and instructor. she says  “you re taking a salsa step and in the middle of it you jump into a jumping jack. when you re mixing the two  that s just funny.” zumba is including and expanding moves from international and western influences such as coast swing  belly dancing  and bhangra.   == conclusion == although latin dance has been evolved and modified over the centuries  its native latin  european  and african roots will always remain in the movements and rhythms of the genre. the great thing about such genre is the rich  cultural history embedded in each dance.   == see also ==  international latin american dance champions world latin dance champions   == references ==   == further reading == sévigny
 jean-pierre. sierra norteña  the influence of latin music on the french-canadian popular song and dance scene  especially as reflected in the career of alys robi and the pedagogy of maurice lacasse-morenoff. montréal  productions juke-box  1994. 13 p. n.b. published text of a paper prepared for  and presented on  on 12 march 1994  the conference  popular music music & identity (montréal  qué.  12–13 march 1994)  under the auspices of the canadian branch of the international association for the study of popular music.
a machinist is a tradesperson who machines using hand tools and machine tools to create or modify a part that is made of metal  plastics  or wood.   == related occupational titles == a traditional machinist is one who can operate  disassemble  reassemble and repair the machine tool as well as build new parts such as gears  splines  and shafts using various machine tools such as mills  lathes  grinders  and planers. some titles reflect further development of machinist skills such as tool and die maker  patternmaker  mold maker  programmer  and operator.  a machinist is one who is called on to fix a problem with a part or to create a new one using metal working  plastic  or in some cases  wood. depending on the company  a machinist can be any or all of the titles listed above. under the machinist title are other specialty titles that refer to specific skills that may be more highly developed to meet the needs of a particular job position  such as fitter (assembles parts)  turning hand  mill hand  and grinder.   == role in manufacturing == a machinist is usually called upon when a part needs to be produced from a material by cutting. such a part may be unique or may be needed in the thousands. this could include a machinery part for a production line or anything that can be made from metal or plastic.  producing a part will often require several steps and more than one machine tool.  each machine tool plays a specific role in cutting away excess material.  when large numbers of parts are needed  production planning is required to plan the most logical workflow through a series of machines. computer numerical controlled (cnc) machines are a special computer-driven tool that can machine a large variety of shapes  and whose use in the workflow depends on the part to be machined.cnc machines are becoming the standard due to their speed  precision  flexibility  and reduced downtime while changing jobs.  production runs consisting of large numbers of parts are more cost effective  and commonly referred to as production work in the trade.  conversely  small production runs are sometimes referred to as prototype or jobbing work. production engineers use blueprints and engineering drawings to produce detailed specifications of the part  especially its geometry (shape)  then decide on a strategy to make it. machine tools are then configured by the machinist or toolset  and production commences. the machinist works with the quality department to ensure the specifications are maintained in the finished product.  large commercial organizations often staff machinists on site in a maintenance mode to ensure continuing operations of the production machinery. the labor cost for this role is significantly lower than costs involved with production shutdowns.   == additive machining == additive machining means 3d printing to create industrial components  prototypes
 tooling  and end-use production parts. additive machining comes into its own in the manufacturing of very small intricate parts  which could not be produced through any other manufacturing process. there are several processes in additive manufacturing which include direct metal deposition  electron beam melting  fused filament fabrication  select laser sintering  and variations of each.   == materials commonly encountered by machinists == a machinist is to metal as a woodcarver is to wood. the most common materials  that machinists make parts from are steel  aluminium  brass  copper  and various alloys of these materials.  other less common materials such as vanadium  zinc  lead  or manganese are often used as alloying elements for the most common materials. materials that machinists work with occasionally are plastics  rubber  glass  and wood products.  rarely  machinists also work with exotic and refractory metals. the term exotic metals is a general term describing out of the ordinary  rare or special purpose metals. a synonym might be space-age. a list of exotic metals might include  but is not limited to  titanium  beryllium  vanadium  chromium  molybdenum and tungsten  as well as special high-temperature metal alloys like inconel or hastelloy (superalloys).  very often the meaning of the term suggests the need for specialized handling and/or tooling to machine them effectively.while the foregoing were primarily the materials that a machinist would be cutting  the cutters that the machinist uses must be harder and tougher than the materials to be cut.  the materials in the cutters a machinist uses are most commonly high speed steel  tungsten carbide  ceramics  borazon  and diamond.machinists usually work to very small tolerances  usually within 0.010  or 0.25 mm (more commonly expressed as ±0.010  (plus or minus ten-thousandths of an inch) or ±0.13 mm)  and sometimes at tolerances as low as 0.0001  (plus or minus one tenth of a thousandth of an inch – or 0.0025 mm) for specialty operations. a machinist deals with all facets of shaping  cutting and some aspects of forming metal  although forming is typically a separate trade.  the operations most commonly performed by machinists are milling  drilling  turning  and grinding.  there are other more specialised operations that a machinist will less frequently be called upon to perform such as honing  keyseating  lapping  and polishing  to name a few.   == tools of the machinist == the tools that a machinist is expected to be proficient with fall into 6 broad categories   measuring tools  the measuring tools come in several basic varieties  comparison tools such as adjustable parallels and plain calipers  direct reading tools such as rules  scales  and vernier calipers  micrometer tools based on screw threads  indicator tools based on clockwork gear movements  electronic measuring tools based on transducers.  many
of these are digital versions of their mechanical predecessors  as with a digital caliper. hand tools  the hand tools are the usual complement of tools found in a complete auto mechanic s set except that auto specialty tools would be absent and some outsized tools would likely be present  such as 1 1/2  (38 mm) open end wrench. machine tools  the machine tools have undergone a dramatic shift in the last 20 years.  manual machines have given way to computer numerically controlled machines (cncs).  for clarity s sake a categorization based on the historical groupings will be offered. each of these groupings has been altered by the advent of cncs and the cncs meld some groups and blur the lines between others. in the past  the most common machine tools fall into 4 categories  drilling machines  bench  floor  radial  and horizontal milling machines  horizontal  vertical  and boring mills turning machines  engine lathe  turret lathe  vertical turret lathe  vertical boring mill grinding machines  surface  cylindrical  centerless  universal work holders  the work holders may include vises  chucks  indexing accessories  pallets  specialty jigs or fixtures  and faceplates tool holders  the tool holders may include chucks  cutter adapters  cutter extension  tool posts  indexable turrets  box tools  quick change adapters  arbors  and collets. cutting tools  cutting tools include various milling cutters such as face mills  shell mills  endmills  and form cutters  various drills  reamers  taps  countersinks  counterbores  and core drills  various turning tools  form tools  and threading tools  various grinding wheels distinguished by their geometry  bond  grit size  and compound.   == see also == list of metalworking occupations machinist calculator international association of machinists and aerospace workers   == references ==   == external links == the machinists union  iamaw
carpentry is a skilled trade and a craft in which the primary work performed is the cutting  shaping and installation of building materials during the construction of buildings  ships  timber bridges  concrete formwork  etc. carpenters traditionally worked with natural wood and did the rougher work such as framing  but today many other materials are also used and sometimes the finer trades of cabinetmaking and furniture building are considered carpentry. in the united states  98.5% of carpenters are male  and it was the fourth most male-dominated occupation in the country in 1999. in 2006 in the united states  there were about 1.5 million carpentry positions. carpenters are usually the first tradesmen on a job and the last to leave. carpenters normally framed post-and-beam buildings until the end of the 19th century  now this old fashioned carpentry is called timber framing. carpenters learn this trade by being employed through an apprenticeship training—normally 4 years—and qualify by successfully completing that country s competence test in places such as the united kingdom  the united states  canada  switzerland  australia and south africa. it is also common that the skill can be learned by gaining work experience other than a formal training program  which may be the case in many places.   == etymology == the word “carpenter” is the english rendering of the old french word carpentier (later  charpentier) which is derived from the latin carpentarius [artifex]  “(maker) of a carriage.” the middle english and scots word (in the sense of “builder”) was wright (from the old english wryhta  cognate with work)  which could be used in compound forms such as wheelwright or boatwright.   === use of terms in the united kingdom === in the uk  carpentry is more correctly used to describe the skill involved in first fixing of timber items such as construction of roofs  floors and timber framed buildings  i.e. those areas of construction that are normally hidden in a finished building. an easy way to envisage this is that first fix work is all that is done before plastering takes place. second fix is done after plastering takes place. second fix work  the installation of items such as skirting boards  architraves  doors and windows is generally regarded as carpentry  however the off-site manufacture and pre-finishing of the items is regarded as joinery. carpentry is also used to construct the formwork into which concrete is poured during the building of structures such as roads and highway overpasses. in the uk  the skill of making timber formwork for poured or in situ concrete is referred to as shuttering.   === use of terms in the united states === carpentry in the united states is historically defined similarly to the united kingdom as the “heavier and stronger” work distinguished from a joiner “...who does lighter and more ornamental work than that of a carpenter...” although the “...work of a carpenter and joiner are often combined.”
joiner is less common than the terms finish carpenter or cabinetmaker. the terms housewright and barnwright were used historically  now occasionally used by carpenters who work using traditional methods and materials. someone who builds custom concrete formwork is a form carpenter.   == history ==  wood is one of mankind s oldest building materials. the ability to shape wood improved with technological advances from the stone age to the bronze age to the iron age. some of the oldest archaeological evidence of carpentry are water well casings built using split oak timbers with mortise and tenon and notched corners excavated in eastern germany dating from about 7 000 years ago in the early neolithic period.relatively little information about carpentry is available from pre-history (before written language) or even recent centuries because the knowledge and skills were passed down person to person  rarely in writing  until the printing press was invented in the 15th century and builders began regularly publishing guides and pattern books in the 18th and 19th centuries. the oldest surviving complete architectural text is vitruvius  ten books collectively titled de architectura  which discuss some carpentry. some of the oldest surviving wooden buildings in the world are temples in china such as the nanchan temple built in 782  the greensted church  parts of which are from the 11th century  and the stave churches in norway from the 12th and 13th centuries.   ==== carpenters in ming china ==== by the beginning of the ming dynasty  emperor taizu categorized people into different occupations. at this time  all the carpenters throughout the state were registered by the imperial court  and the occupation remained strictly hereditary  according to the notes from historian klaas ruitenbeek. in later times of the ming dynasty  roughly in the 1560s  however  people broke such restrictions  and the path into the occupation in the case of the carpentry became less fixed. although the restriction regarding the path into the occupation dissolved in later times of the ming dynasty  approximately starting from 1450s. the lu ban jing (鲁班经) was named after the chinese patriarch of carpenter  lu ban. lu ban lived in the zhou dynasty  2 500 years from modern day and nearly 2 000 years from the beginning of the ming dynasty. although the lu ban jing was entitled as the classic of lu ban  it was compiled during the ming dynasty. one interesting fact about the lu ban jing is that it included a detailed biography of lu ban and his wife lady yun(云氏). according to the biography  lady yun was  blessed with heavenly skills  and she could produce products with higher quality than those produced by lu ban.  being a carpenter requires a set of techniques  especially for the household carpenters. from the first to the last day of the construction  sometimes even long before the beginning of construction  carpenters must treat their work with a lot of
care. with their meticulousness and perseverance  their products were so sophisticated that it appeals to the untrained peoples as impossible. moreover  in ming times  people believed that certain behaviors bring good or bad fortunes  and the carpenters were responsible for helping their customer to make decisions. questions like when to build the house  and which direction should the house face toward were among some of the most frequently asked. as a result  the techniques were both practical and metaphysical  include accurate calculation  using proper tools  avoiding ominous actions  singing for good fortunes  and choosing ideal locations for houses. interestingly is that the carpenters in china will sing prayer songs for their customer to pray for good fortune. the good fortunes involve a series of good things  including wealth  reputation  social ranking  and the sustainability of families. historian ronald knapp recorded one of them in his book china s living houses  the phoenix does not light where there are no treasures. today it perches at the end of the ridgepole. with one swing of my axe  the house will be solid forever. ten thousand years solid  then thousand years prosperous  riches and position  a number one family (凤凰不落无宝地 今日落在脊口里。我将钢斧一摇 一斧打的万年牢。万年牢万年发 富贵荣华头一家).the carpenters in ming china  and particularly the first century of ming china  experienced the division of labor process. ruitenbeek emphasizes that the carpenters were divided into two categories  the “resident artisans” and the “shift artisans.” the resident artisans  according to ruitenbeek  lived in the capital of ming china (first nanjing  then beijing) because of the forced immigration launched by ming taizu. they were required to do ten days for each month in the imperial palace. according to the difference of their household register  these resident artisans were further categorized as military carpenters and civil carpenters. the military carpenters belong to the division of defense  and were required to produce the military arm forces like bows and cannon supports. the civil carpenters belong to the board of work. the shift artisans  on the other hand  did not need to reside in capital regions  but they were required to complete service on behalf of the board of work. meanwhile  carpenters in ming china also avoided intrinsic competitions by establishing guilds. guilds were long-lasting in premodern china  and by the late ming times  it developed into institutions with complete regulations seek to minimize intrinsic competitions. ruitenbeek provides a framework for the guilds of carpentry in ming times  there was a system of apprentice  jourjourneyman andter. welfare was an important task of the guilds  it ensured for example a decent burial for its poorer members.speaking of the codes among the carpenters in the ming dynasty  it includes a set of rituals or taboos generated by people within the occupation. in the case of carpenter  the lu ban jing regulates carpenter’s behavior as it provides a thorough 
“from-cradle-to-tomb-style” of guidelines for the carpenters. the lu ban jing also set the rituals for the carpenters when they were given magical spells. those magical spells  according to lu ban jing  requires a complicated process of preparing the materials and praying for its effectiveness. for instance  carpenters can deliver a curse that forced people to die in river or in water wells. such curse needs a wooden boat  and the carpenters have to turn the boats upside and bury the wooden boat at the northern corner of the house. the mythical traditions for carpenters to deliver blessings and curses are various  and such mysterious rituals negatively influenced people’s impression of carpenters in ming times.   ==== carpenters in europe ==== by the 16th century sawmills were coming into use in europe. the founding of america was partly based on a desire to extract resources from the new continent including wood for use in ships and buildings in europe. in the 18th century part of the industrial revolution was the invention of the steam engine and cut nails. these technologies combined with the invention of the circular saw led to the development of balloon framing which was the beginning of the decline of traditional timber framing. the 19th century saw the development of electrical engineering and distribution which allowed the development of hand-held power tools  wire nails and machines to mass-produce screws. in the 20th century  portland cement came into common use and concrete foundations allowed carpenters to do away with heavy timber sills. also  drywall (plasterboard) came into common use replacing lime plaster on wooden lath. plywood  engineered lumber and chemically treated lumber also came into use.  for types of carpentry used in america see american historic carpentry.   == training ==  carpentry requires training which involves both acquiring knowledge and physical practice. in formal training a carpenter begins as an apprentice  then becomes a journeyman  and with enough experience and competency can eventually attain the status of a master carpenter. today pre-apprenticeship training may be gained through non-union vocational programs such as high school shop classes and community colleges. informally a laborer may simply work alongside carpenters for years learning skills by observation and peripheral assistance. while such an individual may obtain journeyman status by paying the union entry fee and obtaining a journeyman s card (which provides the right to work on a union carpentry crew) the carpenter foreman will  by necessity  dismiss any worker who presents the card but does not demonstrate the expected skill level. carpenters may work for an employer or be self-employed. no matter what kind of training a carpenter has had  some u.s. states require contractors to be licensed which requires passing a written test and having minimum levels of insurance.   === carpentry schools and programs === formal training in the carpentry trade is available in seminars  certificate programs  high-school programs  online classes  in the new construction  restoration  and
preservation carpentry fields. sometimes these programs are called pre-apprenticeship training. in the modern british construction industry  carpenters are trained through apprenticeship schemes where general certificates of secondary education (gcse) in mathematics  english  and technology help but are not essential. however  this is deemed the preferred route  as young people can earn and gain field experience whilst training towards a nationally recognized qualification. there are two main divisions of training  construction-carpentry and cabinetmaking. during pre-apprenticeship  trainees in each of these divisions spend 30 hours a week for 12 weeks in classrooms and indoor workshops learning mathematics  trade terminology  and skill in the use of hand and power tools. construction-carpentry trainees also participate in calisthenics to prepare for the physical aspect of the work. upon completion of pre-apprenticeship  trainees who have successfully passed the graded curriculum (taught by highly experienced journeyman carpenters) are assigned to a local union and to union carpentry crews at work on construction sites or in cabinet shops as first year apprentices. over the next four years  as they progress in status to second year  third year  and fourth year apprentice  apprentices periodically return to the training facility every three months for a week of more detailed training in specific aspects of the trade.   === apprenticeships and journeymen carpenters === tradesmen in countries such as germany and australia are required to fulfill a formal apprenticeship (usually three to four years) to work as a professional carpenter. upon graduation from the apprenticeship  he or she is known as a journeyman carpenter. up through the 19th and even the early 20th century  the journeyman traveled to another region of the country to learn the building styles and techniques of that area before (usually) returning home. in modern times  journeymen are not required to travel  and the term now refers to a level of proficiency and skill. union carpenters in the united states  that is  members of the united brotherhood of carpenters and joiners of america  are required to pass a skills test to be granted official journeyman status  but uncertified professional carpenters may also be known as journeymen based on their skill level  years of experience  or simply because they support themselves in the trade and not due to any certification or formal woodworking education. professional status as a journeyman carpenter in the united states may be obtained in a number of ways. formal training is acquired in a four-year apprenticeship program administered by the united brotherhood of carpenters and joiners of america  in which journeyman status is obtained after successful completion of twelve weeks of pre-apprenticeship training  followed by four years of on-the-job field training working alongside journeyman carpenters. the timber framers guild also has a formal apprenticeship program for traditional timber framing. training is also available in groups like the kim bồng woodworking village in vietnam where apprentices live and work to learn woodworking and carpentry skills. in canada  each province
sets its own standards for apprenticeship. the average length of time is four years and includes a minimum number of hours of both on-the-job training and technical instruction at a college or other institution. depending on the number of hours of instruction an apprentice receives  he or she can earn a certificate of proficiency  making him or her a journeyman  or a certificate of qualification  which allows him or her to practice a more limited amount of carpentry. canadian carpenters also have the option of acquiring an additional interprovincial red seal that allows them to practice anywhere in canada. the red seal requires the completion of an apprenticeship and an additional examination.   === master carpenter === after working as a journeyman for a while  a carpenter may go on to study or test as a master carpenter. in some countries  such as germany  iceland and japan  this is an arduous and expensive process  requiring extensive knowledge (including economic and legal knowledge) and skill to achieve master certification  these countries generally require master status for anyone employing and teaching apprentices in the craft. in others   master carpenter  can be a loosely used term to describe any skilled carpenter. fully trained carpenters and joiners will often move into related trades such as shop fitting  scaffolding  bench joinery  maintenance and system installation.   == materials used == carpenters traditionally worked with natural wood which has been prepared by splitting (riving)  hewing  or sawing with a pit saw or sawmill called lumber (american english) or timber (british english). today natural and engineered lumber and many other building materials carpenters may use are typically prepared by others and delivered to the job site. in 2013 the carpenters union in america used the term carpenter for a catch-all position. tasks performed by union carpenters include installing  ...flooring  windows  doors  interior trim  cabinetry  solid surface  roofing  framing  siding  flooring  insulation  ...acoustical ceilings  computer-access flooring  metal framing  wall partitions  office furniture systems  and both custom or factory-produced materials  ...trim and molding  ... ceiling treatments  ... exposed columns and beams  displays  mantels  staircases...metal studs  metal lath  and drywall...    == health and safety ==   === united states === carpentry is often hazardous work. types of woodworking and carpentry hazards include machine hazards  flying materials  tool projection  fire and explosion  electrocution  noise  vibration  dust and chemicals. in the united states the occupational safety and health administration (osha) tries to prevent illness  injury and fire through regulations. however  self-employed workers are not covered by the osha act. osha claims that  since 1970  workplace fatalities have been reduced by more than 65 percent and occupational injury and illness rates have declined by 67 percent. at the same time  u.s. employment has almost
doubled.  the leading cause of overall fatalities  called the  fatal four  are falls  followed by struck by object  electrocution  and caught-in/between. in general construction  employers must provide working conditions that are free of known dangers. keep floors in work areas in a clean and  so far as possible  a dry condition. select and provide required personal protective equipment at no cost to workers. train workers about job hazards in a language that they can understand.  examples of how to prevent falls includes placing railings and toe-boards at any floor opening which cannot be well covered and elevated platforms and safety harness and lines  safety nets  stair railings and hand rails. safety is not just about the workers on the job site. carpenters work needs to meet the requirements in the life safety code such as in stair building and building codes to promote long term quality and safety for the building occupants.   == types and occupations == a finish carpenter (north america)  also called a joiner (a traditional name now rare in north america)  is one who does finish carpentry  that is  cabinetry  furniture making  fine woodworking  model building  instrument making  parquetry  joinery  or other carpentry where exact joints and minimal margins of error are important. some large-scale construction may be of an exactitude and artistry that it is classed as finish carpentry. a carpenter and joiner has much broader skill sets ranging from joinery  finishing carpentry  building construction and form work. a trim carpenter specializes in molding and trim  such as door and window casings  mantels  baseboards  and other types of ornamental work. cabinet installers may also be referred to as trim carpenters. a cabinetmaker is a carpenter who does fine and detailed work specializing in the making of cabinets made from wood  wardrobes  dressers  storage chests  and other furniture designed for storage. a ship s carpenter specializes in shipbuilding  maintenance  repair techniques and carpentry specific to nautical needs in addition to many other on-board tasks  usually the term refers to a carpenter who has a post on a specific ship. steel warships as well as wooden ones need ship s carpenters  especially for making emergency repairs in the case of battle or storm damage. a shipwright builds wooden ships on land. a cooper is someone who makes barrels  wooden staved vessels of a conical form  of greater length than breadth. a scenic carpenter builds and dismantles temporary scenery and sets in film-making  television  and the theater. a framer is a carpenter who builds the skeletal structure or wooden framework of buildings  most often in the platform framing method. historically  balloon framing was used until the 1950s when fire safety concerns made platform framing inherently better. a carpenter who specializes in building with timbers rather than studs is known as a timber framer and does
traditional timber framing with wooden joints  including mortise-and-tenon joinery  post and beam work with metal connectors  or pole building framing. a luthier is someone who makes or repairs stringed instruments. the word luthier comes from the french word for lute   luth . a log builder builds structures of stacked  horizontal logs including houses  barns  churches  fortifications  and more. a formwork carpenter creates the shuttering and falsework used in concrete construction. in japanese carpentry  daiku is the simple term for carpenter  a miya-daiku (temple carpenter) performs the work of both architect and builder of shrines and temples  and a sukiya-daiku works on teahouse construction and houses. sashimono-shi build furniture and tateguya do interior finishing work.a restoration carpenter is a carpenter who works in historic building restoration  someone who restores a structure to a former state. a conservation carpenter works in architectural conservation  known in the u.s. as a  preservation carpenter  who works in historic preservation  someone who keeps structures from changing. green carpentry specializes in the use of environmentally friendly  energy-efficient and sustainable sources of building materials for use in construction projects. they also practice building methods that require using less material and material that has the same structural soundness.recycled (reclaimed  repurposed) carpentry is carpentry that uses scrap wood and parts of discarded or broken furniture to build new wood products.   == see also == artisan atlanta community toolbank ccg profiles guild takenaka carpentry tools museum  kobe  japan traditional trades woodworking worshipful company of carpenters   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to carpentry at wikimedia commons  media related to wooden architecture at wikimedia commons  carpentry at wikibooks  carpentry  . encyclopædia britannica. 5 (11th ed.). 1911. the institute of carpenters (england) carpenters entry in the occupational outlook handbook of the bureau of labor statistics of the united states department of labor carpenters from europe and beyond
woodworking is the activity or skill of making items from wood  and includes cabinet making (cabinetry and furniture)  wood carving  joinery  carpentry  and woodturning.   == history ==  along with stone  clay and animal parts  wood was one of the first materials worked by early humans. microwear analysis of the mousterian stone tools used by the neanderthals show that many were used to work wood. the development of civilization was closely tied to the development of increasingly greater degrees of skill in working these materials.  among early finds of wooden tools are the worked sticks from kalambo falls  clacton-on-sea and lehringen. the spears from schöningen (germany) provide some of the first examples of wooden hunting gear. flint tools were used for carving. since neolithic times  carved wooden vessels are known  for example  from the linear pottery culture wells at kückhofen and eythra. examples of bronze age wood-carving include tree trunks worked into coffins from northern germany and denmark and wooden folding-chairs. the site of fellbach-schmieden in germany has provided fine examples of wooden animal statues from the iron age. wooden idols from the la tène period are known from a sanctuary at the source of the seine in france.   === ancient egypt === there is significant evidence of advanced woodworking in ancient egypt. woodworking is depicted in many extant ancient egyptian drawings  and a considerable amount of ancient egyptian furniture (such as stools  chairs  tables  beds  chests) have been preserved. tombs represent a large collection of these artefacts and the inner coffins found in the tombs were also made of wood. the metal used by the egyptians for woodworking tools was originally copper and eventually  after 2000 bc bronze as ironworking was unknown until much later.commonly used woodworking tools included axes  adzes  chisels  pull saws  and bow drills. mortise and tenon joints are attested from the earliest predynastic period. these joints were strengthened using pegs  dowels and leather or cord lashings. animal glue came to be used only in the new kingdom period. ancient egyptians invented the art of veneering and used varnishes for finishing  though the composition of these varnishes is unknown. although different native acacias were used  as was the wood from the local sycamore and tamarisk trees  deforestation in the nile valley resulted in the need for the importation of wood  notably cedar  but also aleppo pine  boxwood and oak  starting from the second dynasty.   === ancient rome === woodworking was essential to the romans. it provided  sometimes the only  material for buildings  transportation  tools  and household items. wood also provided pipes  dye  waterproofing materials  and energy for heat.although most examples of roman woodworking have been lost  the literary record preserved much of the contemporary knowledge. vitruvius dedicates an entire chapter of his de architectura to timber  preserving many details. pliny  while
not a botanist  dedicated six books of his natural history to trees and woody plants  providing a wealth of information on trees and their uses.   === ancient china === the progenitors of chinese woodworking are considered to be lu ban (魯班) and his wife lady yun  from the spring and autumn period (771 to 476 bc).  lu ban is said to have introduced the plane  chalk-line  and other tools to china. his teachings were supposedly left behind in the book lu ban jing (魯班經   manuscript of lu ban ). despite this  it is believed that the text was written some 1500 years after his death. this book is filled largely with descriptions of dimensions for use in building various items such as flower pots  tables  altars  etc.  and also contains extensive instructions concerning feng shui. it mentions almost nothing of the intricate glue-less and nail-less joinery for which chinese furniture was so famous.   == modern day == with the advances in modern technology and the demands of industry  woodwork as a field has changed. the development of computer numeric controlled (cnc) machines  for example  has made us able to mass-produce and reproduce products faster  with less waste  and often more complex in design than ever before. cnc wood routers can carve complicated and highly detailed shapes into flat stock  to create signs or art.  rechargeable power tools speed up creation of many projects and require much less body strength than in the past  for example when boring multiple holes. skilled fine woodworking  however  remains a craft pursued by many. there remains demand for hand crafted work such as furniture and arts  however with rate and cost of production  the cost for consumers is much higher.   == materials == historically  woodworkers relied upon the woods native to their region  until transportation and trade innovations made more exotic woods available to the craftsman. woods are typically sorted into three basic types  hardwoods typified by tight grain and derived from broadleaf trees  softwoods from coniferous trees  and man-made materials such as plywood and mdf. hardwoods  botanically known as angiosperms  are deciduous and shed their leaves annually with temperature changes. softwoods come from trees botanically known as gymnosperms  which are coniferous  cone-bearing  and stay green year round. although a general pattern  softwoods are not necessarily always “softer” than hardwoods  and vice versa.softwood is most commonly found in the regions of the world with lower temperatures and is typically less durable  lighter in weight  and more vulnerable to pests and fungal attacks in comparison to hardwoods. they typically have a paler color and a more open grain than hardwoods  which contributes to the tendency of felled softwood to shrink and swell as it dries. softwoods usually have a lower density  around 25-37lb/cu ft  which can compromise its strength. density
 however  does vary within both softwoods and hardwoods depending on the wood s geographical origin and growth rate. however  the lower density of softwoods also allows it to have a greater strength with lighter weight. in the united states  softwoods are typically cheaper and more readily available and accessible. most softwoods are suitable for general construction  especially framing  trim  and finish work  and carcassing.hardwoods are separated into two categories  temperate and tropical hardwoods  depending on their origin. temperate hardwoods are found in the regions between the tropics and poles  and are of particular interest to wood workers for their cost-effective aesthetic appeal and sustainable sources. tropical hardwoods are found within the equatorial belt  including africa  asia  and south america. hardwoods flaunt a higher density  around 65lb/cu ft as a result of slower growing rates and is more stable when drying. as a result of its high density  hardwoods are typically heavier than softwoods but can also be more brittle. while there are an abundant number of hardwood species  only 200 are common enough and pliable enough to be used for woodworking. hardwoods have a wide variety of properties  making it easy to find a hardwood to suit nearly any purpose  but they are especially suitable for outdoor use due to their strength and resilience to rot and decay. the coloring of hardwoods ranges from light to very dark  making it especially versatile for aesthetic purposes. however  because hardwoods are more closely grained  they are typically harder to work than softwoods. they are also harder to acquire in the united states and  as a result  are more expensive.  typically furniture such as tables and chairs is made using solid stock from hardwoods due to its strength and resistance to warping. additionally  they also have a greater variety of grain patterns and color and take a finish better which allows the woodworker to exercise a great deal of artistic liberty. hardwoods can be cut more cleanly and leave less residue on sawblades and other woodworking tools. cabinet/fixture makers employ the use of plywood and other man made panel products.  some furniture  such as the windsor chair involve green woodworking  shaping with wood while it contains its natural moisture prior to drying.   === common softwoods used for furniture ===   ==== cedar ==== cedars are strong  aromatic softwoods that are capable of enduring outdoor elements  the most common of which is the western red cedar. western red cedar can sustain wet environments without succumbing to rot  and as a result is commonly used for outdoor projects such as patios  outdoor furniture  and building exteriors. this wood can be easily found at most home centers for a moderate price.   ==== fir ==== fir  also known as douglas fir  is very inexpensive and common at local home centers. it has a characteristic straight  pronounced grain
with a red-brown tint. however  its grain pattern is relatively plain and it does not stain well  so fir is commonly used when the finished product will be painted. while commonly used for building  this softwood would also be suitable for furniture-making.   === common hardwoods used for furniture ===   ==== ash ==== this hardwood is relatively easy to work with and takes stain well  but its white to light brown color with a straight grain is visually appealing on its own. however  ash is much more difficult to find than other common woods  and won’t be found at the local home center. larger lumber yards should have it in stock.   ==== birch ==== whether yellow or white birch  these hardwoods are stable and easy to work with. despite this  birch is prone to blotching when stained  so painting birch products is probably best. birch is easily found at many home centers and is a relatively inexpensive hardwood.   ==== cherry ==== popular and easy to work with  cherry is in high demand for its reddish-brown color and ease of staining and finishing. cherry likely won’t be at the local home center  but should be at a lumberyard for a somewhat expensive price. this hardwood is a very common material for furniture  and is resistant to normal wear-and-tear  but it is best for indoor pieces.   ==== mahogany ==== a hardwood  mahogany has a trademark reddish-brown to deep-red tint and is known as “one of the great furniture woods.” however  mahogany is not typically grown in sustainable forests  and thus runs a steep price at local lumber yards.   ==== oak ==== with two varieties  red and white  oak is known to be easy to work with and relatively strong. however  furniture makers often opt for white oak over red oak for its attractive figure and moisture-resistance. depending on the kind needed  oak can probably be found at a local home center or a lumberyard for a bit pricier than other hardwoods.   ==== maple ==== with strength  sturdiness  and durability  maple is a common material for furniture for the bedroom and even china cabinets. maple is moisture-resistant and frequently displays stand-out swirls in the wood grain  an aesthetically pleasing differentiator from other hardwoods. while most commonly a lighter color  maple also can take stains and paint well.   === factors in choosing materials === there are many factors to consider when deciding what type of wood to use for a project. one of the most important is the workability of the wood  the way in which it responds when worked by hand or tools  the quality of the grain  and how it responds to adhesives and finishes. when the workability of wood is high  it offers a lower resistance when cutting and has a diminished blunting effect on tools. highly workable wood
is easier to manipulate into desired forms. if the wood grain is straight and even  it will be much easier to create strong and durable glued joints. additionally  it will help protect the wood from splitting when nailed or screwed. coarse grains require a lengthy process of filing and rubbing down the grain to produce a smooth result.another important factor to be considered is the durability of the wood  especially in regards to moisture. if the finished project will be exposed to moisture (e.g. outdoor projects) or high humidity or condensation (e.g. in kitchens or bathrooms)  then the wood needs to be especially durable in order to prevent rot. because of their oily qualities  many tropical hardwoods such as teak and mahogany are popular for such applications.   ==== woods with good working properties ==== agba (gossweilerodendron balsamiferum) alder (alnus glutinosa) basswood (tilia americana) obeah (triplochiton scleroxylon) pine (pinus) western cedar (thuja plicata)   ==== very durable woods ==== teak (tectona grandis) iron (milicia excelsa) jarrah (eucalyptus marginata) chestnut (castanea) oak (quercus) cedar (thuja)   === woods used for carving === while many woods can be used for carving  there are some clear favorites  including aspen  basswood  butternut  black walnut  and oak. because it has almost no grain and is notably soft  basswood is particularly popular with beginner carvers. it is used in many lower-cost instruments like guitars and electric basses. aspen is similarly soft  although slightly harder  and readily available and inexpensive. butternut has a deeper hue than basswood and aspen and has a nice grain that is easy to carve  and thus friendly for beginners. it s also suitable for furniture. while more expensive that basswood  aspen  and butternut  black walnut is a popular choice for its rich color and grain. lastly  oak is a strong  sturdy  and versatile wood for carving with a defined grain. it s also a popular wood for furniture making.   == notable woodworkers ==   == see also ==   == notes ==   == references == feirer  john l. (1988). cabinetmaking and millwork. mission hills california  glencoe publishing. isbn 0-02-675950-0. frid  tage (1979). tage frid teaches woodworking. newton  connecticut  taunton press. isbn 0-918804-03-5. joyce  edward (1987). encyclopedia of furniture making. revised and expanded by alan peters. new york  sterling publishing co. isbn 0-8069-6440-5. roubo  andré jacob (1769–1784). the art of the joiner. paris  french academy of sciences.   === further reading === naylor  andrew. a review of wood machining literature with a special focus on sawing. biores  april 2013   == external links == video about the zafimaniry peoples in madagascar. videos about woodworking published by institut für den wissenschaftlichen film. available in the av-portal of the german national library of science and technology.
editing is the process of selecting and preparing writing  photography  visual  audible  and film media used to convey information. the editing process can involve correction  condensation  organization  and many other modifications performed with an intention of producing a correct  consistent  accurate and complete work.the editing process often begins with the author s idea for the work itself  continuing as a collaboration between the author and the editor as the work is created. editing can involve creative skills  human relations and a precise set of methods.  there are various editorial positions in publishing. typically  one finds editorial assistants reporting to the senior-level editorial staff and directors who report to senior executive editors. senior executive editors are responsible for developing a product for its final release. the smaller the publication  the more these roles overlap. the top editor at many publications may be known as the chief editor  executive editor  or simply the editor. a frequent and highly regarded contributor to a magazine may acquire the title of editor-at-large or contributing editor. mid-level newspaper editors often manage or help to manage sections  such as business  sports and features. in u.s. newspapers  the level below the top editor is usually the managing editor. in the book publishing industry  editors may organize anthologies and other compilations  produce definitive editions of a classic author s works (scholarly editor)  and organize and manage contributions to a multi-author book (symposium editor or volume editor). obtaining manuscripts or recruiting authors is the role of an acquisitions editor or a commissioning editor in a publishing house. finding marketable ideas and presenting them to appropriate authors are the responsibilities of a sponsoring editor. copy editors correct spelling  grammar and align writings to house style. changes to the publishing industry since the 1980s have resulted in nearly all copy editing of book manuscripts being outsourced to freelance copy editors.at newspapers and wire services  copy editors write headlines and work on more substantive issues  such as ensuring accuracy  fairness  and taste. in some positions  they design pages and select news stories for inclusion. at u.k. and australian newspapers  the term is sub-editor. they may choose the layout of the publication and communicate with the printer. these editors may have the title of layout or design editor or (more so in the past) makeup editor.   == scholarly books and journals == within the publishing environment  editors of scholarly books are of three main types  each with particular responsibilities   acquisitions editor (or commissioning editor in britain)  who contracts with the author to produce the copy project editor or production editor  who sees the copy through its stages from manuscript to bound book and usually assumes most of the budget and schedule responsibilities copy editor or manuscript editor  who prepares the copy for conversion into printed form.in the case of multi-author edited volumes  before the manuscript is delivered
to the publisher it has undergone substantive and linguistic editing by the volume s editor  who works independently of the publisher. as for scholarly journals  where spontaneous submissions are more common than commissioned works  the position of journal editor or editor-in-chief replaces the acquisitions editor of the book publishing environment  while the roles of production editor and copy editor remain. however  another editor is sometimes involved in the creation of scholarly research articles. called the authors  editor  this editor works with authors to get a manuscript fit for purpose before it is submitted to a scholarly journal for publication. the primary difference between copy editing scholarly books and journals and other sorts of copy editing lies in applying the standards of the publisher to the copy. most scholarly publishers have a preferred style that usually specifies a particular dictionary and style manual—for example  the chicago manual of style  the mla style manual or the apa publication manual in the us  or the new hart s rules in the u.k.   == technical editing ==  technical editing involves reviewing text written on a technical topic  identifying usage errors and ensuring adherence to a style guide. technical editing may include the correction of grammatical mistakes  misspellings  mistyping  incorrect punctuation  inconsistencies in usage  poorly structured sentences  wrong scientific terms  wrong units and dimensions  inconsistency in significant figures  technical ambivalence  technical disambiguation  statements conflicting with general scientific knowledge  correction of synopsis  content  index  headings and subheadings  correcting data and chart presentation in a research paper or report  and correcting errors in citations. large companies dedicate experienced writers to the technical editing function. organizations that cannot afford dedicated editors typically have experienced writers peer-edit text produced by less experienced colleagues. it helps if the technical editor is familiar with the subject being edited. the  technical  knowledge that an editor gains over time while working on a particular product or technology does give the editor an edge over another who has just started editing content related to that product or technology. but essential general skills are attention to detail  the ability to sustain focus while working through lengthy pieces of text on complex topics  tact in dealing with writers  and excellent communication skills.   == editing services ==  editing is a growing field of work in the service industry. paid editing services may be provided by specialized editing firms or by self-employed (freelance) editors. editing firms may employ a team of in-house editors  rely on a network of individual contractors or both. such firms are able to handle editing in a wide range of topics and genres  depending on the skills of individual editors. the services provided by these editors may be varied and can include proofreading  copy editing  online editing  developmental editing  editing for search engine optimization (seo)  etc. self-employed editors work directly
for clients (e.g.  authors  publishers) or offer their services through editing firms  or both. they may specialize in a type of editing (e.g.  copy editing) and in a particular subject area. those who work directly for authors and develop professional relationships with them are called authors  editors.   == see also == audio editing author editing film editing stealth edit textual scholarship video editing writer   == references ==   == further reading == morrison  blake (6 august 2005).  black day for the blue pencil . the guardian. overholser  geneva (december 1998).  editor inc . american journalism review. stephen  leslie (1898).  the evolution of editors . studies of a biographer. 1. london  duckworth and co. pp. 37–73. ó brógáin  séamas (2015). a dictionary of editing. 1. dublin  claritas. greenberg  susan l. (2015) editors talk about editing  insights for readers  writers and publishers  new york  peter lang   == external links ==  the dictionary definition of editing at wiktionary  media related to editing at wikimedia commons
proofreading is the reading of a galley proof or an electronic copy of a publication to detect and correct production errors of text or art. proofreading is the final step in the editorial cycle.   == professional ==   === traditional method === a proof is a typeset version of copy or a manuscript page. they often contain typos introduced through human error. traditionally  a proofreader looks at an increment of text on the copy and then compares it to the corresponding typeset increment  and then marks any errors (sometimes called  line edits ) using standard proofreaders  marks. unlike copy editing  proofreading s defining procedure is to work directly with two sets of information at the same time. proofs are then returned to the typesetter for correction. correction-cycle proofs will typically have one descriptive term  such as  bounce   bump  or  revise  unique to the department or organization and used for clarity to the strict exclusion of any other. it is a common practice for  all  such corrections  no matter how slight  to be sent again to a proofreader to be checked and initialed  thus establishing the principle of higher responsibility for proofreaders as compared to their typesetters or artists.   === alternative methods ===  copy holding  or  copy reading  employs two readers per proof. the first reads the text aloud literally as it appears  usually at a comparatively fast but uniform rate. the second reader follows along and marks any pertinent differences between what is read and what was typeset. this method is appropriate for large quantities of boilerplate text where it is assumed that the number of errors will be comparatively small. experienced copy holders employ various codes and verbal short-cuts that accompany their reading. the spoken word  digits  for example  means that the numbers about to be read are not words spelled out  and  in a hole  can mean that the upcoming segment of text is within parentheses.  bang  means an exclamation point. a  thump  or  screamer  made with a finger on the table represents the initial cap  comma  period  or similar obvious attribute being read simultaneously. thus the line of text (he said the address was 1234 central blvd.  and to hurry ) would be read aloud as  in a hole [thump] he said the address was digits 1 2 3 4 [thump] central [thump] buluhvuhd [thump] comma and to hurry bang . mutual understanding is the only guiding principle  so codes evolve as opportunity permits. in the above example  two thumps after  buluhvuhd  might be acceptable to proofreaders familiar with the text.  double reading . a single proofreader checks a proof in the traditional manner but then passes it on to a second reader who repeats the process. both initial the proof. note that with both copy holding and double reading
 responsibility for a given proof is necessarily shared by two individuals.  scanning  used to check a proof without reading it word for word  has become common with computerization of typesetting and the popularization of word processing. many publishers have their own proprietary typesetting systems  while their customers use commercial programs such as word. before the data in a word file can be published  it must be converted into a format used by the publisher. the end product is usually called a conversion. if a customer has already proofread the contents of a file before submitting it to a publisher  there will be no reason for another proofreader to re-read it from the copy (although this additional service may be requested and paid for). instead  the publisher is held responsible only for formatting errors  such as typeface  page width  and alignment of columns in tables  and production errors such as text inadvertently deleted. to simplify matters further  a given conversion will usually be assigned a specific template. given typesetters of sufficient skill  experienced proofreaders familiar with their typesetters  work can accurately scan their pages without reading the text for errors that neither they nor their typesetters are responsible for.   === style guides and checklists === proofreaders are expected to be consistently accurate by default because they occupy the last stage of typographic production before publication. before it is typeset  copy is often marked up by an editor or customer with various instructions as to typefaces  art  and layout. often these individuals will consult a style guide of varying degrees of complexity and completeness. such guides are usually produced in-house by the staff or supplied by the customer  and should be distinguished from professional references such as the chicago manual of style  the ap stylebook  the elements of style  or gregg reference manual. when appropriate  proofreaders may mark errors in accordance with their house guide instead of the copy when the two conflict. where this is the case  the proofreader may justifiably be considered a copy editor. checklists are commonly employed in proof-rooms where there is sufficient uniformity of product to distill some or all of its components to a list format. they may also act as a training tool for new hires. checklists are never comprehensive  however  proofreaders still have to find all errors not mentioned or described on them  thus limiting their usefulness.   === qualifications === the educational level of proofreaders  in general  is on a par with that of their co-workers. typesetters  graphic artists  and word processors rarely need to have a college degree  and a perusal of online job listings for proofreaders will show that although listings may specify a degree for proofreaders  many do not. those same listings will also show a tendency for degree-only positions to be in firms in commercial fields such as retail  medicine  or insurance 
where the data to be read is internal documentation not intended for public consumption per se. such listings  specifying a single proofreader to fill a single position  are more likely to require a degree as a method of reducing the candidate pool but also because the degree is perceived as a requirement for any potentially promotable white-collar applicant. experience is discounted at the outset in preference to a credential  indicating a relatively low starting wage appropriate for younger applicants. in these kinds of multitasking desktop-publishing environments  human resources departments may even classify proofreading as a clerical skill generic to literacy itself. where this occurs  it is not unusual for proofreaders to find themselves guaranteeing the accuracy of higher-paid co-workers. in contrast  printers  publishers  advertising agencies and law firms tend not to require a degree specifically. in these professionally demanding single-tasking environments  the educational divide surrounds the production department instead of the company itself. promotion is rare for these proofreaders because they tend to be valued more for their present skill set than for any potential leadership ability. they are often supervised by a typesetter also without a degree  or by an administrative manager with little or no production experience who delegates day-to-day responsibilities to a typesetter. it follows that such listings tend to stress experience  offer commensurately higher rates of pay  and include mention of a proofreading test.   === proofreader testing === applicants. although many commercial and college-level proofreading courses of varying quality can be found online  practical job training for proofreaders has declined along with its status as a craft. numerous books are also available that instruct the basics to their readers. such tools of self-preparation have by and large replaced formal workplace instruction. proofreader applicants are tested primarily on their spelling  speed  and skill in finding errors in the sample text. toward that end  they may be given a list of ten or twenty classically difficult words and a proofreading test  both tightly timed. the proofreading test will often have a maximum number of errors per quantity of text and a minimum amount of time to find them. the goal of this approach is to identify those with the best skill set. a contrasting approach to testing is to identify and reward persistence more than an arbitrarily high level of expertise. for the spelling portion of the test  that can be accomplished by providing a dictionary  lengthening the word list conspicuously  and making clear that the test is not timed. for the proofreading portion  a suitable language-usage reference book (e.g.  the chicago manual of style) can be provided. (note that knowing where to find needed information in such specialized books is itself an effective component of the test.) removing the pressure of what is essentially an asap deadline will identify those applicants with marginally greater reservoirs of persistence  stamina  and commitment. at the same time  by mooting the need for applicants to make
use of a memorized list of difficult words and a studied knowledge of the more common grammatical traps (affect  effect  lay  lie)  applicants learn that their success depends primarily on a quality at least theoretically available to anyone at any time without preparation. formal employee testing is usually planned and announced well in advance  and may have titles  such as levels testing  skills evaluation  etc.  they are found in corporate or governmental environments with a large enough hr staff to devote to preparing and administering the tests. informal employee testing takes place whenever a manager feels the need to take a random sampling of a proofreader s work by double-reading selected pages. usually  this is done without warning  and sometimes it will be done secretly. it can be highly effective  and there will certainly be times when such re-reading is justified  but care must be taken. there are two basic approaches. the first is to re-read a proof within its deadline and in the department itself. thus the manager will read from the same copy that the first reader saw  and be aware of any volume and deadline pressures the first reader was under  and can directly observe the individual in real time. this approach can also be followed as a matter of routine. the goal then is not to confirm a specific suspicion of poor job performance by a particular reader  but rather to confirm a general assumption that the proofreading staff needs ongoing monitoring. the second approach to informal testing is to wait for some days or weeks and then  as time allows  randomly select proofs to re-read while outside the department. such proofs may or may not be accompanied by the copy pages that the proofreader saw. here the re-reader is examining the proof from the perspective of typographical and formatting accuracy alone  ignoring how many other pages the first reader had read that day  and had yet to read  and how many pages were successfully read and how many deadlines were met under a given day s specific conditions.   === economics === proofreading cannot be fully cost-effective where volume or unpredictable workflow prevents proofreaders from managing their own time. examples are newspapers  thermographic trade printing of business cards  and network hubs. the problem in each of these environments is that jobs cannot be put aside to be re-read as needed. in the first two cases  volumes and deadlines dictate that all jobs be finished as soon as possible  in the third case  jobs presently on-site at the hub are hurried  regardless of their formal deadline  in favor of possible future work that may arrive unpredictably. where proofs can programmatically be read only once  the quality will randomly but persistently fall below expectations. even the best and most experienced readers will not be able to be consistently accurate enough to justify premium pay. production technology can also moot
the need to pay a premium for proofreading. in the example of thermographic business-card printing  even when there are no reprints  there is considerable wastage of paper and ink in preparing each of the press runs  which are separated by color. when (as often happens) there is unused space available on the plate  there is no increase in production cost for reprints that use that space. only when reprints are so numerous that they push production staff into significant overtime would they increase costs. but significant overtime is usually the result of a high volume in new orders using up the eight-hour day. in such industries proofreading need only – and can only – make a marginal difference to be cost-effective. as for the customers  many will never return even when their jobs are perfect  and enough of those who do need a reprint will find the retailer s cost-saving price to be satisfactory enough to tolerate a late delivery. only where workload volume does not compress all deadlines to asap and the workflow is reasonably predictable can proofreading be worth a premium wage. inflexible deadlines mandate a delivery time  but in doing so they necessarily do not mandate delivery before that time. if deadlines are consistently maintained instead of arbitrarily moved up  proofreaders can manage their own time by putting proofs aside at their own discretion for re-reading later. whether the interval is a few seconds or overnight  it enables proofs to be viewed as both familiar and new. where this procedure is followed  managers can expect consistently superior performance. however  re-reading focuses responsibility instead of dividing it (as double-reading and copy holding  both described above  do) and obviously requires extra effort from proofreaders and a measure of independence from management. instead of managers controlling deadlines  deadlines control managers  and leeway is passed to the proofreaders as well as commensurate pay.   === proofreading and copy-editing === the term proofreading is sometimes used to refer to copy-editing  and vice versa. although there is necessarily some overlap  proofreaders typically lack any real editorial or managerial authority. what they can do is mark queries for typesetters  editors  or authors. to clarify matters at the outset  some advertised vacancies come with a notice that the job advertised is not a writing or editing position and will not become one. creativity and critical thinking by their very nature conflict with the strict copy-following discipline that commercial and governmental proofreading requires. thus proofreading and editing are fundamentally separate responsibilities. in contrast  copy editors focus on a sentence-by-sentence analysis of the text to  clean it up  by improving grammar  spelling  punctuation  syntax  and structure. the copy editor is usually the last editor that an author will work with. copy editing focuses intensely on style  content  punctuation  grammar  and consistency of usage.   == self == primary examples include job seekers  own résumés and
student term papers. proofreading this kind of material presents a special challenge  first because the proofreader/editor is usually the author  second because such authors are usually unaware of the inevitability of errors and the effort required to find them  and third  as finding any final errors often occurs just when stress levels are highest and time shortest  readers  minds resist identifying them as errors. under these conditions  proofreaders tend to see only what they want to see.   == digital == digital proofreading has taken many forms in recent years  such as assistive software and grammar checking tools that have made locating and correcting errors very convenient for writers of all kinds. these systems are at present unreliable.  as well  new cloud computing developments such as google doc editing services have allowed for real-time editing and proofreading that can be done for clients while they watch the process  thus helping them to improve their writing.   == in fiction == examples of proofreaders in fiction include the history of the siege of lisbon (historia do cerco de lisboa)  a 1989 novel by nobel laureate jose saramago  the short story  proofs  in george steiner s proofs and three parables (1992)  and the short story  evermore  in cross channel (1996) by julian barnes  in which the protagonist miss moss is a proofreader for a dictionary. under the headline  orthographical  in james joyce s novel ulysses  leopold bloom  watching the typesetter foreman mr. nannetti read over a  limp galleypage  thinks  proof fever .   == demand for proof-editing == for documents that do not require a formal typesetting process  such as reports  journal articles and e-publications  the costs involved with making changes at the proofreading stage are no longer as relevant. this  along with the time and cost pressures felt by businesses  self-publishers and academics  has led to a demand for one-stage proofreading and copy-editing services where a professional proofreader/copy-editor – often a freelancer  sometimes now called an author editor – will be contracted to provide an agreed level of service to an agreed deadline and cost. proof-editing tends to exist outside of the traditional publishing realm  and usually involves a single stage of editing. it is considered preferable to have separate copy-editing and proofreading stages  so proof-editing is  by definition  a compromise but one that modern professional on-screen proofreaders and copy-editors are increasingly offering in order to meet the demand for flexible proofreading and editing services.    === an example table of distinctions between different services  editing  copy-editing  proof-editing and proofreading === as this is such a new term (discussed in a guest blog on the society for editors and proofreaders website) and tends to be offered by freelancers to individuals and companies rather than being a formal  industry-defined service  exactly what is included can vary. below
is an example of the distinctions between services for work on non-fiction.   == see also == american and british english spelling differences distributed proofreaders etaoin shrdlu fact checking galley proof iso 5776 obelism printing press check style guide typographical syntax writing circle   == references ==   == external links == importance of editing and proofreading by enago the importance of the proof-reader by john wilson project gutenberg distributed proofreaders
pharmacists  also known as chemists (commonwealth english) or druggists (north american and  archaically  commonwealth english)  are health professionals who practice in pharmacy  the field of health sciences focusing on safe and effective medication use. pharmacists undergo university-level education to understand the biochemical mechanisms and actions of drugs  drug uses  therapeutic roles  side effects  potential drug interactions  and monitoring parameters. this is mated to anatomy  physiology  and pathophysiology. pharmacists interpret and communicate this specialized knowledge to patients  physicians  and other health care providers. among other licensing requirements  different countries require pharmacists to hold either a bachelor of pharmacy  master of pharmacy  or doctor of pharmacy degree. the most common pharmacist positions are that of a community pharmacist (also referred to as a retail pharmacist  first-line pharmacist or dispensing chemist)  or a hospital pharmacist  where they instruct and counsel on the proper use and adverse effects of medically prescribed drugs and medicines. in most countries  the profession is subject to professional regulation. depending on the legal scope of practice  pharmacists may contribute to prescribing (also referred to as  pharmacist prescriber ) and administering certain medications (e.g.  immunizations) in some jurisdictions. pharmacists may also practice in a variety of other settings  including industry  wholesaling  research  academia  military  and government.   == nature of work ==  historically  the fundamental role of pharmacists as a healthcare practitioner was to check and distribute drugs to doctors for medication that had been prescribed to patients. in more modern times  pharmacists advise patients and health care providers on the selection  dosages  interactions  and side effects of medications  and act as a learned intermediary between a prescriber and a patient. pharmacists monitor the health and progress of patients to ensure the safe and effective use of medication. pharmacists may practice compounding  however  many medicines are now produced by pharmaceutical companies in a standard dosage and drug delivery form. in some jurisdictions  pharmacists have prescriptive authority to either independently prescribe under their own authority or in collaboration with a primary care physician through an agreed upon protocol called a collaborative practice agreement.increased numbers of drug therapies  ageing but more knowledgeable and demanding populations  and deficiencies in other areas of the health care system seem to be driving increased demand for the clinical counselling skills of the pharmacist. one of the most important roles that pharmacists are currently taking on is one of pharmaceutical care. pharmaceutical care involves taking direct responsibility for patients and their disease states  medications  and management of each to improve outcomes. pharmaceutical care has many benefits that may include but are not limited to  decreased medication errors  increased patient compliance in medication regimen  better chronic disease state management  including hypertension and other cardiovascular disease risk factors  strong pharmacist–patient relationship  and decreased long-term costs of medical care. pharmacists are
often the first point-of-contact for patients with health inquiries. thus pharmacists have a significant role in assessing medication management in patients  and in referring patients to physicians. these roles may include  but are not limited to   clinical medication management  including reviewing and monitoring of medication regimens assessment of patients with undiagnosed or diagnosed conditions  and ascertaining clinical medication management needs specialized monitoring of disease states  such as dosing drugs in kidney and liver failure compounding medicines providing pharmaceutical information providing patients with health monitoring and advice  including advice and treatment of common ailments and disease states supervising pharmacy technicians and other staff oversight of dispensing medicines on prescription provision of and counseling about non-prescription or over-the-counter drugs education and counseling for patients and other health care providers on optimal use of medicines (e.g.  proper use  avoidance of overmedication) referrals to other health professionals if necessary pharmacokinetic evaluation promoting public health by administering immunizations constructing drug formularies designing clinical trials for drug development working with federal  state  or local regulatory agencies to develop safe drug policies ensuring correctness of all medication labels including auxiliary labels member of interprofessional care team for critical care patients symptom assessment leading to medication provision and lifestyle advice for community-based health concerns (e.g. head colds  or smoking cessation) staged dosing supply (e.g. opioid substitution therapy)   === education and credentialing ===  the role of pharmacy education  pharmacist licensing  and continuing education vary from country to country and between regions/localities within countries. in most countries  pharmacists must obtain a university degree at a pharmacy school or related institution  and/or satisfy other national/local credentialing requirements. in many contexts  students must first complete pre-professional (undergraduate) coursework  followed by about four years of professional academic studies to obtain a degree in pharmacy (such as doctorate of pharmacy). pharmacists are educated in pharmacology  pharmacognosy  chemistry  organic chemistry  biochemistry  pharmaceutical chemistry  microbiology  pharmacy practice (including drug interactions  medicine monitoring  medication management)  pharmaceutics  pharmacy law  physiology  anatomy  pharmacokinetics  pharmacodynamics  drug delivery  pharmaceutical care  nephrology  hepatology  and compounding of medications. additional curriculum may cover diagnosis with emphasis on laboratory tests  disease state management  therapeutics and prescribing (selecting the most appropriate medication for a given patient). upon graduation  pharmacists are licensed  either nationally or regionally  to dispense medication of various types in the areas they have trained for. some may undergo further specialized training  such as in cardiology or oncology.   === practice specialization === specialties include    == training and practice by country ==   === armenia === the ministry of education and ministry of health oversee pharmacy school accreditation in armenia. pharmacists are expected to have competency in the who model list of essential medicines (eml)  the use of standard treatment guidelines  drug information  clinical pharmacy  and medicine supply management.
there are currently no laws requiring pharmacists to be registered  but all pharmacies must have a license to conduct business. according to a world health organization (who) report from 2010  there are 0.53 licensed pharmacists and 7.82 licensed pharmacies per 10 000 people in armenia. pharmacists are able to substitute for generic equivalents at point of dispensing.   === australia ===  the australian pharmacy council is the independent accreditation agency for australian pharmacists. it conducts examinations on behalf of the pharmacy board of australia towards eligibility for registration. the australian college of pharmacy provides continuing education programs for pharmacists. wages for pharmacists in australia appear to have stagnated. the award wages for a pharmacist is $812 a week. pharmacist graduates are the lowest paid university graduates most years. most pharmacists do earn above the award wage  the average male pharmacist earns $65 000  a female pharmacist averages $56 500. over recent years  wages have stagnated  and even gone backwards. there are more graduates expected in the next few years making it even harder to get a job. job security and increase in wages with regards to cpi could be unlikely. this is due to the large numbers of pharmacy graduates in recent years  and government desire to lower pbs costs. contract and casual work is becoming more common. a contract pharmacist is self-employed and often called a locum  these pharmacists may be hired for one shift or for a longer period of time. there are accounts of underemployment and unemployment emerging recently.   === canada === the canadian pharmacists association (cpha) is the national professional organization for pharmacists in canada. specific requirements for practice vary across provinces  but generally include a bachelor of science in pharmacy from a recognized university  successful completion of a national board examination through the pharmacy examining board of canada  and practical experience through an apprenticeship/internship program. the vast majority (80%) of canada s licensed pharmacists work in community pharmacies  another 15 percent in hospital or institutional pharmacies  and the remainder work in situations that may not legally require licensed pharmacists such as associations  pharmaceutical companies  and consulting firms. the wages for pharmacists  at about cad$95 000  have been said to be slightly better than australia but not as good as in the united states. this likely depends on what parts of canada and the united states are compared. wages being significantly higher in canada than most developing countries  recruitment of pharmacists from south africa and other countries with acute health workforce shortages to work in private franchise chains is subject to controversy. british columbiaa pharmacist must be registered with the college of pharmacists of british columbia to practice in this province. a bachelor of science in pharmaceutical sciences is the minimum requirement to practice as a pharmacist in bc. the university of british columbia is the only institution in the province that trains pharmacists. professional associations include the college of pharmacists of british columbia and the
british columbia pharmacy association.  albertathe university of alberta is the only institution in the province awarding pharmacy degrees  offering both bachelor of pharmacy and doctor of pharmacy programs. pharmacists must be registered with the alberta college of pharmacists in order to practice in alberta.  ontariothe ontario college of pharmacists grants licenses to practice as a pharmacist in the province of ontario. international graduates of pharmacy must successfully complete the pharmacist evaluating exam and pharmacist qualifying exam along with a studentship and internship to be registered as a pharmacist in ontario. canadian graduates of the pharmacy programme can sit the qualifying exam directly without the evaluating exam.   === germany === in germany  the education and training is divided into three sections  each ending with a state examination   university  basic studies (at least four semesters) university  main studies (at least four semesters) community pharmacy / hospital pharmacy / industry  practical training (12 months  6 months in a community pharmacy).after the third state examination a person must become licensed as an rph ( registered pharmacist ) for a licence to practice pharmacy.  today  many pharmacists work as employees in public pharmacies. they will be paid according to the labour agreement of adexa and employer associations.   === japan ===   ==== history ==== in ancient japan  the men who fulfilled roles similar to pharmacists were respected. the place of pharmacists in society was settled in the taihō code (701) and re-stated in the yōrō code (718). ranked positions in the pre-heian imperial court were established  and this organizational structure remained largely intact until the meiji restoration (1868). in this highly stable hierarchy  the pharmacists — and even pharmacist assistants — were assigned status superior to all others in health-related fields such as physicians and acupuncturists. in the imperial household  the pharmacist was even ranked above the two personal physicians of the emperor.   ==== contemporary ==== as of 1997  46 universities of pharmacy in japan graduated about 8000 students annually. contemporary practice of clinical pharmacists in japan (as evaluated in september 2000) focuses on dispensing of drugs  consultation with patients  supplying drug information  advising on prescription changes and amending prescriptions. these practices have been linked to decreases in the average number of drugs in prescriptions  drug costs and incidence of adverse drug events.   === nigeria === training to become a registered pharmacist in nigeria involves a five-year course after six years of secondary/high school or four years after eight years of secondary/high school (i.e. after 2 years of advanced-level studies in  accredited universities). the degree awarded by most pharmacy schools is a  bachelor of pharmacy degree (b.pharm.) however  in the near future  all schools will offer a 6-year first degree course leading to the award of a pharm.d (doctor of pharmacy degree). the university of benin has started the pharm.d programme with other pharmacy schools planning to start soon. the pharmacy degree
in nigeria is unclassified i.e. awarded without first class  second class upper  etc.  however graduates could be awarded pass with distinctions in specific fields such as pharmaceutics  pharmacology  medicinal chemistry etc. pharmacy graduates are required to undergo 1 year of tutelage under the supervision of an already registered pharmacist(a preceptor) in a recognized and designated institution before they can become registered pharmacists. the profession is regulated by a government statutory body called the pharmacists council of nigeria. the west african post graduate college of pharmacy runs post-registration courses on advanced-level practice in various fields of pharmacy. it is a college jointly  funded by a number of countries in the west africa sub-region. there are thousands of nigerian-trained pharmacists registered and practicing in countries such as the us  the uk  canada etc.  due to the relatively poor public sector salaries in nigeria.   === pakistan === in pakistan  the pharm.d. (doctor of pharmacy) degree is a graduate-level professional doctorate degree. twenty-one universities are registered with the pharmacy council of pakistan for imparting pharmacy courses. in 2004 the higher education commission of pakistan and the pharmacy council of pakistan revised the syllabus and changed the 4-year b.pharmacy (bachelor of pharmacy) program to a 5-year pharm.d. (doctor of pharmacy) program. all 21 universities have started the 5-year pharm.d program. in 2011 the pharmacy council of pakistan approved the awarding of a doctor of pharmacy degree  a five-year programme at the department of pharmacy  university of peshawar.   === poland === polish pharmacists have to complete a 5-and-a-half-years master of pharmacy programme at medical university and obtain the right to practice as a pharmacist in poland from district pharmaceutical council. the programme includes 6-months pharmacy training. the polish name for the master of pharmacy degree (m. pharm.) is magister farmacji (mgr farm). not only pharmacists  but also pharmaceutical technicians are allowed to dispense prescription medicines  except for narcotics  psychotropics and very potent medicines. pharmacists approve prescriptions fulfilled by pharmaceutical technicians subsequently. pharmaceutical technicians have to complete 2-years post-secondary occupational school and 2-years pharmacy training afterwards. pharmacists are eligible to prescribe medicines in exceptional circumstances. all polish pharmacies are obliged to produce compound medicines. most pharmacists in poland are pharmacy managers and are responsible for pharmacy marketing in addition to traditional activities. to become a pharmacy manager in poland  a pharmacist is expected to have at least 5-years professional experience. all pharmacists in poland have to maintain an adequate knowledge level by participating in various university- and industry-based courses and arrangements or by undergoing postgraduate specialization.   === sweden === in sweden  the national board of health and welfare regulates the practice of all legislated health care professionals  and is also responsible for registration of pharmacists in the country. the education to become a licensed pharmacist is regulated by the european union  and states that minimum educational requirements are five years of university studies in a pharmacy program  of which six months must be
a pharmacy internship. to be admitted to pharmacy studies  students must complete a minimum of three years of gymnasium  similar to high school (school for about 15–20-year-old students) program in natural science after elementary school (6–16-year-olds). only three universities in the whole of sweden offer a pharmacy education  uppsala university  where the faculty of pharmacy is located  the university of gothenburg  and umeå university. in sweden  pharmacists are called apotekare. at pharmacies in sweden  pharmacists work together with another class of legislated health care professionals called receptarier  in english so-called prescriptionists  who have completed studies equal to a bachelor of science in pharmacy  i.e.  three years of university. prescriptionists also have dispensing rights in sweden  norway  finland and iceland. the majority of the staff in a pharmacy are apotekstekniker or  pharmacy technicians  with a 3 semesters education at a vocational college.   === switzerland === in switzerland  the federal office of public health regulates pharmacy practice. four swiss universities offer a major in pharmaceutical studies  the university of basel  the university of geneva  the university of lausanne and the eth zurich. to major in pharmaceutical studies takes at least five years. students spend their last year as interns in a pharmacy combined with courses at the university  with focus on the validation of prescriptions and the manufacturing of pharmaceutical formulations. since all public health professions are regulated by the government it is also necessary to acquire a federal diploma in order to work in a pharmacy. it is not unusual for pharmaceutical studies majors to work in other fields such as the pharmaceutical industry or in hospitals. pharmacists work alongside pharma assistants  an apprenticeship that takes three years to complete. pharmacists can further specialise in various fields  which is organized by pharmasuisse the pharmacists association of switzerland.   === tanzania === in tanzania  pharmacy practice is regulated by the national pharmacy board  which is also responsible for registration of pharmacists in the country. by international standards  the density of pharmacists is very low  with a mean of 0.18 per 10 000 population. the majority of pharmacists are found in urban areas  with some underserved regions having only 2 pharmacists per region. according to 2007–2009 data  the largest group of pharmacists was employed in the public sector (44%). those working in private retail pharmacies were 23%  and the rest were mostly working for private wholesalers  pharmaceutical manufacturers  in academia/teaching  or with faith-based or non-governmental facilities. the salaries of pharmacists varied significantly depending on the place of work. those who worked in the academia were the highest paid followed by those who worked in the multilateral non-governmental organizations. the public sector including public retail pharmacies and faith based organizations paid much less. the ministry of health salary scale for medical doctors was considerably higher than that of pharmacists despite having a difference of only one year of training. 
 === trinidad and tobago === in trinidad and tobago  pharmacy practice is regulated by the pharmacy board of trinidad and tobago  which is responsible for the registration of pharmacists in the twin islands.  the university of the west indies in st. augustine offers a 4-year bachelor of science in pharmacy as the sole practicing degree of pharmacy.  graduates undertake a 6-month internship  known as pre-registration  under the supervision of a registered pharmacist  at a pharmacy of their choosing  whether community or institutional.  after completion of the required pre-registration period  the graduate can then apply to the pharmacy board to become a registered pharmacist.  after working 1 calendar year as a registered pharmacist  the individual can become a registered  responsible pharmacist.  being a registered  responsible pharmacist allows the individual to license a pharmacy and be a pharmacist-in-charge.   === united kingdom ===  in the united kingdom  most pharmacists working in the national health service practice in hospital pharmacy or community pharmacy. pharmacists can undertake additional training to allow them to prescribe medicines for specific conditions.  the royal commission on the national health service in 1979 reported that there were nearly 3 000 pharmacists employed in the hospital and community health service in the uk at that time.  they were enthusiastic about the idea that pharmacists might develop their role of giving advice to the public.in british english (and to some extent australian english)  the professional title known as  pharmacist  is also known as  dispensing chemist  or  more commonly   chemist . a dispensing chemist usually operates from a pharmacy or chemist s shop  and is allowed to fulfil medical prescriptions and sell over-the-counter drugs and other health-related goods. the new professional role for pharmacist as prescriber has been recognized in the uk since may 2006  called the  pharmacist independent prescriber . once qualified  a pharmacist independent prescriber can prescribe any licensed medicine for any medical condition within their competence. this includes controlled drugs except schedule 1 and prescribing certain drugs for the treatment of addiction (cocaine  diamorphine (uk pharmaceutical name for heroin) and dipipanone).   ==== education and registration ==== pharmacists  pharmacy technicians and pharmacy premises in the united kingdom are regulated by the general pharmaceutical council (gphc) for england  scotland and wales and by the pharmaceutical society of northern ireland for northern ireland. the role of regulatory and professional body on the mainland was previously carried out by the royal pharmaceutical society of great britain  which remained as a professional body after handing over the regulatory role to the gphc in 2010.the following criteria must be met for qualification as a pharmacist in the united kingdom (the northern irish body and the gphc operate separately but have broadly similar registration requirements)  successful completion of a 4-year master of pharmacy degree at a gphc accredited university. pharmacists holding degrees in pharmacy from overseas institutions are
able to fulfill this stage by undertaking the overseas pharmacist assessment programme (ospap)  which is a one-year postgraduate diploma. on completion of the ospap  the candidate would proceed with the other stages of the registration process in the same manner as a uk student. completion of a 52-week preregistration training period. this is a period of paid or unpaid employment  in an approved hospital or community pharmacy under the supervision of a pharmacist tutor. during this time the student must collect evidence of having met certain competency standards set by the gphc. a pass mark in the gphc registration assessment (formally an exam). this includes a closed-book paper and an open-book/mental calculations paper (using the british national formulary and the gphc s  standards of conduct  ethics and performance  document as reference sources). the student must achieve an overall mark of 70%  which must include at least 70% in the calculations section of the open-book paper. from june 2016  the assessment will involve two papers  as before but the use of a calculator will now be allowed. however  reference sources will no longer be allowed in the assessment. instead  relevant extracts of the british national formulary will be provided within the assessment paper. satisfactorily meeting the gphc s fitness to practice standards.   === united states === in 2014 the united states bureau of labor statistics revealed that there were 297 100 american pharmacist jobs. by 2024 that number is projected to grow by 3%. the majority (65%) of those pharmacists work in retail settings  mostly as salaried employees but some as self-employed owners. about 22% work in hospitals  and the rest mainly in mail-order or internet pharmacies  pharmaceutical wholesalers  practices of physicians  and the federal government.all graduating pharmacists must now obtain the doctor of pharmacy (pharm.d.) degree before they are eligible to sit for the north american pharmacist licensure examination (naplex) to enter into pharmacy practice.   ==== pharmacy school accreditation ==== the accreditation council for pharmacy education (acpe) was founded in 1932 as the accrediting body for schools of pharmacy in the united states. the mission of acpe is “to assure and advance excellence in education for the profession of pharmacy.”  acpe is recognized for the accreditation of professional degree programs by the united states department of education (usde) and the council for higher education accreditation (chea). since 1975  acpe has also been the accrediting body for continuing pharmacy education. the acpe board of directors are appointed by the american association of colleges of pharmacy (aacp)  the american pharmacists association (apha)  the national association of boards of pharmacy (nabp) (three appointments each)  and the american council on education (one appointment). to obtain licensure in the united states  applicants for the north american pharmacist licensure examination (naplex) must graduate from an acpe accredited school of pharmacy. acpe publishes standards that schools of pharmacy must comply with to gain accreditation. a pharmacy school pursuing accreditation must first apply and
be granted pre-candidate status. these schools have met all the requirements for accreditation  but have not yet enrolled any students. this status indicates that the school of pharmacy has developed its program in accordance with the acpe standards and guidelines. once a school has enrolled students  but has not yet had a graduating class  they may be granted candidate status. the expectations of a candidate program are that they continue to mature in accordance with stated plans. the graduates of a candidate program are the same as those of fully accredited programs. full accreditation is granted to a program once they have demonstrated they comply with the standards set forth by acpe. the customary review cycle for established accredited programs is six years  whereas for programs achieving their initial accreditation this cycle is two years. these are comprehensive on-site evaluations of the programs. additional evaluations may be conducted at the discretion of acpe in the interim between comprehensive evaluations.   ==== education ==== acceptance into a doctorate of pharmacy program depends upon completing specific prerequisites or obtaining a transferable bachelor s degree. pharmacy school is four years of graduate school (accelerated pharmacy schools go january to january and are only 3 years)  which include at least one year of practical experience. graduates receive a doctorate of pharmacy (pharmd) upon graduation. most schools require students to take a pharmacy college admissions test pcat and complete 90 credit hours of university coursework in the sciences  mathematics  composition  and humanities before entry into the pharmd program. due to the large admittance requirements and highly competitive nature of the field  most pharmacy students complete a bachelor s degree before entry to pharmacy school. possible prerequisites   besides taking classes  additional requirements before graduating may include a certain number of hours for community service  e.g.  working in hospitals  clinics  and retail. estimated timeline  4 years undergraduate + 4 years doctorate + 1–2 years residency + 1–3 years fellowship = 8–13 years a doctorate of pharmacy (except non-traditional  i.e. transferring a license from another country) is the only degree accepted by the national associate of boards of pharmacy nabp to be eligible to  sit  for the north american pharmacist licensure examination (naplex). previously the united states had a 5-year bachelor s degree in pharmacy. for bs pharmacy graduates currently licensed in us  there are 10 universities offering non-traditional doctorate degree programs via part-time  weekend or on-line programs. these are programs fully accredited by accreditation council for pharmacy education (acpe) but only available to current bs pharmacy graduates with a license to practice pharmacy. some institutions still offer 6 year accelerated pharmd programs (similar to 6 year md programs)  though in both cases the issuance of a doctoral degree in less than 8 years is controversial. the current pharm.d. degree curriculum is considerably different from that of the prior bs in pharmacy. it now includes extensive didactic clinical preparation  a full year of hands-on practice
experience in a wider array of healthcare settings  and a greater emphasis on clinical pharmacy practice pertaining to pharmacotherapy optimization. legal requirements in the us to becoming a pharmacist include  graduating from an accredited pharmd program  conducting a specified number of internship hours under a licensed pharmacist (i.e. 1800 hours in some states)  passing the naplex  and passing a multi-state pharmacy jurisprudence exam mpje.  arkansas  california  and virginia have their own exams instead of the mpje and pharmacists must pass the arkansas jurisprudence exam  california jurisprudence exam  and virginia law exam  respectively.residency is an option for post-graduates that is typically 1–2 years in length. a residency gives licensed pharmacists decades of clinical experience in an extremely condensed timeframe of only a few short years. in order for new graduates to remain competitive  employers generally favor residency trained applicants for clinical positions. the profession is moving toward resident-trained pharmacists who wish to provide direct patient care clinical services. in 1990  the american association of colleges of pharmacy (aacp) required the new professional degree. graduates from a pharmd program may also elect to do a fellowship that is geared toward research. fellowships can varying in length but last 1–3 years depending on the program and usually require 1 year of residency at minimum.   ==== specialization and credentialing ==== american pharmacists can become certified in recognized specialty practice areas by passing an examination administered by one of several credentialing boards.  the board of pharmaceutical specialties certifies pharmacists in thirteen specialties  ambulatory care pharmacy cardiology pharmacy compounded sterile preparations pharmacy critical care pharmacy geriatric pharmacy infectious diseases pharmacy nuclear pharmacy nutrition support pharmacy oncology pharmacy pediatric pharmacy pharmacotherapy psychiatric pharmacy solid organ transplant pharmacy the commission for certification in geriatric pharmacy certifies pharmacists in geriatrics specialty practice. the american board of applied toxicology certifies pharmacists and other medical professionals in applied toxicology.   ==== advanced practice pharmacist ==== california pharmacists can apply for advanced practice pharmacist (aph) licenses from the california state board of pharmacy. senate bill 493  written by senator ed hernandez  established a section on the advanced practice pharmacist and outlines the definition  scope of practice  qualifications  and regulations of those holding this license. with the passage of senate bill 159  written by scott wiener  pharmacists in california are now authorized to furnish pre-exposure prophylaxis (prep) and post-exposure prophylaxis (pep) to patients without a physician s prescription. the passage of assembly bill 1535 also authorizes pharmacists in california to furnish naloxone without a physician s prescription.an aph can   perform patient assessments order and interpret drug therapy related tests refer patients to other healthcare providers participate in the evaluation and management of diseases and health conditions in collaboration with other health care providers initiate  adjust  or discontinue therapy pursuant to the regulations outlined in the bill  furnish smoking cessation aids (such as nicotine replacement therapy) furnish oral self-administered contraception (birth control pills) administer vaccinations pursuant
to the latest cdc standards for anyone ages 3+all 50 states permit pharmacists to provide vaccination services  but specific protocols vary between statesqualifications   to qualify for an advanced practice pharmacist license in california  the following requirements must be met  hold an active pharmacist license in good standing with the california state board of pharmacy meet two of these three criteria possess a current certification in relevant area of practice. applicants can provide a copy of the certification award or a letter from certification program confirming the award. completed a postgraduate residency earned in the united states through an accredited postgraduate institution. applicant can provide a copy of residency certificate awarded by the institution or ask the institution to submit a letter of completion directly to the board. provided 1 500 hours of clinical experience under a collaborative practice agreement or protocol to patients within 10 years of application  where clinical experience includes initiating  adjusting  modifying or discontinuing drug therapy of patients the aph applying for renewal must complete 10 hours of continuing education in 1 or more areas relevant to their clinical practice.   ==== earnings and wages ==== the american pharmacy journal of education in 2014 reported the average salary around $112 160.according to the 2010  pharmacy compensation survey  directors of pharmacy $125 200 retail staff pharmacists $113 600 hospital staff pharmacists $111 700 mail order staff pharmacists $109 300 clinical pharmacists $113 400according to the us bureau of labor statistics – occupational outlook handbook  2016–17 edition  median annual wages of wage and salary pharmacists in may 2015 were $121 500.   === vietnam === school students must take a national exam to enter a university of pharmacy or the pharmacy department of a university of medicine and pharmacy. about 5–7% of students can pass the exam. there are 3 aspects to the exam. these are on math  chemistry  and physics or biology. after being trained in the university students receive a 5-year bachelor s degree in pharmacy. or they are university pharmacists (university pharmacist to discriminate between college pharmacist or vocational pharmacist in some countries of the world these pharmacist are call pharmacist assistants). an alternative method of obtaining a bachelor s degree is as follows. school pupils study in a college of pharmacy or a vocational school of pharmacy. after attending the school or college they go to work. and with two years of practice they could take an exam to enter university of pharmacy or the pharmacy department of a university of medicine and pharmacy. this exam is easier than the national one. passing the exam they continue studying to gain 3-year bachelor s degrees or 4-year bachelor s degrees. this degree is considered equivalent to a 5-year bachelor s degree.   == notable pharmacists == charles alderton  inventor of dr pepper caleb bradham  inventor of pepsi-cola etienne j. caire  louisiana politician buddy carter  georgia politician john richard fowler  texas politician pravin gordhan  previous minister
of finance of south africa (2009–14) chuck hopson  american politician luke howard   the father of meteorology  hubert humphrey  u.s. vice-president 1965–69 david jack  leader of research that developed major asthma drugs ronnie johns  american politician bernard lebas  american politician fred mills  american politician edna o brien  irish author and playwright hans christian ørsted  danish physicist who discovered electromagnetism john pemberton  inventor of coca-cola friedrich sertürner  discovered morphine in 1804 jim l. smithson  arkansas politician joseph swan  inventor of the incandescent light bulb evan vickers  utah politician jim wilson  los angeles city council member ikililou dhoinine  comorian politician tadeusz pankiewicz  polish activitist during world war ii in kraków ghetto   == see also ==   == references ==   == further reading == (in japanese) asai  t. (1985). nyokan tūkai. tokyo  kōdan-sha. (in french) titsingh  isaac  ed. (1834). [siyun-sai rin-siyo/hayashi gahō  1652]  nipon o daï itsi ran  ou  annales des empereurs du japon.  paris  oriental translation fund of great britain and ireland....click link for digitized  full-text copy of this book (in french)   == external links == pharmacy at curlie international pharmaceutical federation (fip) international pharmaceutical students federation (ipsf) this article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the united states government.
pharmacology is the branch of pharmaceutical sciences which is concerned with the study of drug or medication action  where a drug can be broadly defined as any man-made  natural  or endogenous (from within the body) molecule which exerts a biochemical or physiological effect on the cell  tissue  organ  or organism (sometimes the word pharmacon is used as a term to encompass these endogenous and exogenous bioactive species). more specifically  it is the study of the interactions that occur between a living organism and chemicals that affect normal or abnormal biochemical function. if substances have medicinal properties  they are considered pharmaceuticals. the field encompasses drug composition and properties  synthesis and drug design  molecular and cellular mechanisms  organ/systems mechanisms  signal transduction/cellular communication  molecular diagnostics  interactions  chemical biology  therapy  and medical applications and antipathogenic capabilities. the two main areas of pharmacology are pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. pharmacodynamics studies the effects of a drug on biological systems  and pharmacokinetics studies the effects of biological systems on a drug. in broad terms  pharmacodynamics discusses the chemicals with biological receptors  and pharmacokinetics discusses the absorption  distribution  metabolism  and excretion (adme) of chemicals from the biological systems. pharmacology is not synonymous with pharmacy and the two terms are frequently confused. pharmacology  a biomedical science  deals with the research  discovery  and characterization of chemicals which show biological effects and the elucidation of cellular and organismal function in relation to these chemicals. in contrast  pharmacy  a health services profession  is concerned with the application of the principles learned from pharmacology in its clinical settings  whether it be in a dispensing or clinical care role. in either field  the primary contrast between the two is their distinctions between direct-patient care  pharmacy practice  and the science-oriented research field  driven by pharmacology.   == etymology == the word  pharmacology  is derived from greek φάρμακον  pharmakon   drug  poison  spell  and -λογία  -logia  study of   knowledge of  (cf. the etymology of pharmacy). pharmakon is related to pharmakos  the ritualistic sacrifice or exile of a human scapegoat or victim in ancient greek religion.   == history ==  the origins of clinical pharmacology date back to the middle ages  with pharmacognosy and avicenna s the canon of medicine  peter of spain s commentary on isaac  and john of st amand s commentary on the antedotary of nicholas. early pharmacology focused on herbalism and natural substances  mainly plant extracts. medicines were compiled in books called pharmacopoeias. crude drugs have been used since prehistory as a preparation of substances from natural sources. however  the active ingredient of crude drugs are not purified and the substance is adulterated with other substances. traditional medicine varies between cultures and may be specific to a particular culture  such as in traditional chinese  mongolian  tibetan and
korean medicine. however much of this has since been regarded as pseudoscience. pharmacological substances known as entheogens may have spiritual and religious use and historical context. in the 17th century  the english physician nicholas culpeper translated and used pharmacological texts. culpepper detailed plants and the conditions they could treat. in the 18th century  much of clinical pharmacology was established by the work of william withering. pharmacology as a scientific discipline did not further advance until the mid-19th century amid the great biomedical resurgence of that period.  before the second half of the nineteenth century  the remarkable potency and specificity of the actions of drugs such as morphine  quinine and digitalis were explained vaguely and with reference to extraordinary chemical powers and affinities to certain organs or tissues. the first pharmacology department was set up by rudolf buchheim in 1847  in recognition of the need to understand how therapeutic drugs and poisons produced their effects. subsequently  the first pharmacology department in england was set up in 1905 at university college london. pharmacology developed in the 19th century as a biomedical science that applied the principles of scientific experimentation to therapeutic contexts. the advancement of research techniques propelled pharmacological research and understanding. the development of the organ bath preparation  where tissue samples are connected to recording devices  such as a myograph  and physiological responses are recorded after drug application  allowed analysis of drugs  effects on tissues. the development of the ligand binding assay in 1945 allowed quantification of the binding affinity of drugs at chemical targets. modern pharmacologists use techniques from genetics  molecular biology  biochemistry  and other advanced tools to transform information about molecular mechanisms and targets into therapies directed against disease  defects or pathogens  and create methods for preventative care  diagnostics  and ultimately personalized medicine.   == divisions == the discipline of pharmacology can be divided into many sub disciplines each with a specific focus.   === systems of the body ===  pharmacology can also focus on specific systems comprising the body. divisions related to bodily systems study the effects of drugs in different systems of the body. these include neuropharmacology  in the central and peripheral nervous systems  immunopharmacology in the immune system. other divisions include cardiovascular  renal and endocrine pharmacology. psychopharmacology  is the study of the effects of drugs on the psyche  mind and behavior  such as the behavioral effects of psychoactive drugs. it incorporates approaches and techniques from neuropharmacology  animal behavior and behavioral neuroscience  and is interested in the behavioral and neurobiological mechanisms of action of psychoactive drugs. the related field of neuropsychopharmacology focuses on the effects of drugs at the overlap between the nervous system and the psyche. pharmacometabolomics  also known as pharmacometabonomics  is a field which stems from metabolomics  the quantification and analysis of metabolites produced by the body. it refers to the direct measurement of metabolites in an individual s bodily fluids  in order
to predict or evaluate the metabolism of pharmaceutical compounds  and to better understand the pharmacokinetic profile of a drug. pharmacometabolomics can be applied to measure metabolite levels following the administration of a drug  in order to monitor the effects of the drug on metabolic pathways. pharmacomicrobiomics studies the effect of microbiome variations on drug disposition  action  and toxicity. pharmacomicrobiomics is concerned with the interaction between drugs and the gut microbiome. pharmacogenomics is the application of genomic technologies to drug discovery and further characterization of drugs related to an organism s entire genome. for pharmacology regarding individual genes  pharmacogenetics studies how genetic variation gives rise to differing responses to drugs. pharmacoepigenetics studies the underlying epigenetic marking patterns that lead to variation in an individual s response to medical treatment.   === clinical practice and drug discovery ===  pharmacology can be applied within clinical sciences. clinical pharmacology is the basic science of pharmacology focusing on the application of pharmacological principles and methods in the medical clinic and towards patient care and outcomes. an example of this is posology  which is the study of how medicines are dosed.pharmacology is closely related to toxicology. both pharmacology and toxicology are scientific disciplines that focus on understanding the properties and actions of chemicals. however  pharmacology emphasizes the therapeutic effects of chemicals  usually drugs or compounds that could become drugs  whereas toxicology is the study of chemical s adverse effects and risk assessment.pharmacological knowledge is used to advise pharmacotherapy in medicine and pharmacy.   ==== drug discovery ==== drug discovery is the field of study concerned with creating new drugs. it encompases the subfields of drug design and development. drug discovery starts with drug design  which is the inventive process of finding new drugs. in the most basic sense  this involves the design of molecules that are complementary in shape and charge to a given biomolecular target. after a lead compound has been identified through drug discovery  drug development involves bringing the drug to the market. drug discovery is related to pharmacoeconomics  which is the sub-discipline of health economics that considers the value of drugs pharmacoeconomics evaluates the cost and benefits of drugs in order to guide optimal healthcare resource allocation. the techniques used for the discovery  formulation  manufacturing and quality control of drugs discovery is studied by pharmaceutical engineering  a branch of engineering. safety pharmacology specialises in detecting and investigating potential undesirable effects of drugs. development of medication is a vital concern to medicine  but also has strong economical and political implications. to protect the consumer and prevent abuse  many governments regulate the manufacture  sale  and administration of medication. in the united states  the main body that regulates pharmaceuticals is the food and drug administration and they enforce standards set by the united states pharmacopoeia. in the european union  the main body that regulates pharmaceuticals is the ema and they enforce standards set by the european pharmacopoeia. the metabolic stability and the reactivity
of a library of candidate drug compounds have to be assessed for drug metabolism and toxicological studies. many methods have been proposed for quantitative predictions in drug metabolism  one example of a recent computational method is sporcalc. if the chemical structure of a medicinal compound is altered slightly  this could slightly or dramatically alter the medicinal properties of the compound depending on the level of alteration as it relates to the structural composition of the substrate or receptor site on which it exerts its medicinal effect  a concept referred to as the structural activity relationship (sar). this means that when a useful activity has been identified  chemists will make many similar compounds called analogues  in an attempt to maximize the desired medicinal effect(s) of the compound. this development phase can take anywhere from a few years to a decade or more and is very expensive.these new analogues need to be developed. it needs to be determined how safe the medicine is for human consumption  its stability in the human body and the best form for delivery to the desired organ system  like tablet or aerosol. after extensive testing  which can take up to 6 years  the new medicine is ready for marketing and selling.as a result of the long time required to develop analogues and test a new medicine and the fact that of every 5000 potential new medicines typically only one will ever reach the open market  this is an expensive way of doing things  often costing over 1 billion dollars. to recoup this outlay pharmaceutical companies may do a number of things  carefully research the demand for their potential new product before spending an outlay of company funds. obtain a patent on the new medicine preventing other companies from producing that medicine for a certain allocation of time.the inverse benefit law describes the relationship between a drugs therapeutic benefits and its marketing. when designing drugs  the placebo effect must be considered to assess the drug s true therapeutic value. drug development uses techniques from medicinal chemistry to chemically design drugs. this overlaps with the biological approach of finding targets and physiological effects.   === experimentation and analysis === theoretical pharmacology is a field of research uses techniques from computational chemistry  and molecular mechanics. theoretical pharmacology aims at rationalizing the relation between the observed activity of a particular drug to its structural features. it aims to find relations between structure and activity. furthermore  on the basis of the structure theoretical pharmacology aims to predict the biological activity of new drugs based on their properties and to predict new classes of drugs. theoretical pharmacology uses pharmacometrics  which are mathematical models of biology  pharmacology  disease  and physiology used to describe and quantify interactions between drugs with pharmacology  including beneficial effects and adverse effects. pharmacometrics can be applied to quantify drug  disease and trial information to aid efficient drug development  regulatory decisions and rational drug treatment in patients.experimental pharmacology involves the
study of pharmacology through bioassay  to test the efficacy and potency of a drug. systems pharmacology or network pharmacology is the application of systems biology principles in the field of pharmacology. pharmacoinformatics relates to the broader field of bioinformatics. ethopharmacology (not to be confused with ethnopharmacology) relates to ethology and studies drugs in the context of animal behaviours.   === wider contexts === pharmacology can be studied in relation to wider contexts than the physiology of individuals. for example  pharmacoepidemiology is the study of the effects of drugs in large numbers of people and relates to the broader fields of epidemiology and public health. pharmacoenvironmentology or environmental pharmacology is a field intimately linked with ecology and public health. human health and ecology are intimately related so environmental pharmacology studies the environmental effect of drugs and pharmaceuticals and personal care products in the environment.drugs may also have ethnocultural importance  so ethnopharmacology studies the ethnic and cultural aspects of pharmacology.   === emerging fields === photopharmacology is an emerging approach in medicine in which drugs are activated and deactivated with light. the energy of light is used to change for shape and chemical properties of the drug  resulting in different biological activity. this is done to ultimately achieve control when and where drugs are active in a reversible manner  to prevent side effects and pollution of drugs into the environment.   == theory of pharmacology ==  the study of chemicals requires intimate knowledge of the biological system affected. with the knowledge of cell biology and biochemistry increasing  the field of pharmacology has also changed substantially. it has become possible  through molecular analysis of receptors  to design chemicals that act on specific cellular signaling or metabolic pathways by affecting sites directly on cell-surface receptors (which modulate and mediate cellular signaling pathways controlling cellular function). chemicals can have pharmacologically relevant properties and effects. pharmacokinetics describes the effect of the body on the chemical (e.g. half-life and volume of distribution)  and pharmacodynamics describes the chemical s effect on the body (desired or toxic).   === systems  receptors and ligands ===  pharmacology is typically studied with respect to particular systems  for example endogenous neurotransmitter systems. the major systems studied in pharmacology can be categorised by their ligands and include acetylcholine  adrenaline  glutamate  gaba  dopamine  histamine  serotonin  cannabinoid and opioid. molecular targets in pharmacology include receptors  enzymes and membrane transport proteins. enzymes can be targeted with enzyme inhibitors. receptors are typically categorised based on structure and function. major receptor types studied in pharmacology include g protein coupled receptors  ligand gated ion channels and receptor tyrosine kinases.   === pharmacodynamics ===  pharmacological models include the hill equation  cheng-prusoff equation and schild regression. pharmacological theory often investigates the binding affinity of ligands to their receptors.  medication is said to have a narrow or wide therapeutic index  certain safety factor or therapeutic window. this describes the ratio of desired effect to
toxic effect. a compound with a narrow therapeutic index (close to one) exerts its desired effect at a dose close to its toxic dose. a compound with a wide therapeutic index (greater than five) exerts its desired effect at a dose substantially below its toxic dose. those with a narrow margin are more difficult to dose and administer  and may require therapeutic drug monitoring (examples are warfarin  some antiepileptics  aminoglycoside antibiotics). most anti-cancer drugs have a narrow therapeutic margin  toxic side-effects are almost always encountered at doses used to kill tumors. the effect of drugs can be described with loewe additivity.   === pharmacokinetics ===  pharmacokinetics is the study of the bodily absorption  distribution  metabolism  and excretion of drugs.when describing the pharmacokinetic properties of the chemical that is the active ingredient or active pharmaceutical ingredient (api)  pharmacologists are often interested in l-adme   liberation – how is the api disintegrated (for solid oral forms (breaking down into smaller particles))  dispersed  or dissolved from the medication  absorption – how is the api absorbed (through the skin  the intestine  the oral mucosa)  distribution – how does the api spread through the organism  metabolism – is the api converted chemically inside the body  and into which substances. are these active (as well)  could they be toxic  excretion – how is the api excreted (through the bile  urine  breath  skin) drug metabolism is assessed in pharmacokinetics and is important in drug research and prescribing.   == administration  drug policy and safety ==   === drug policy ===  in the united states  the food and drug administration (fda) is responsible for creating guidelines for the approval and use of drugs. the fda requires that all approved drugs fulfill two requirements   the drug must be found to be effective against the disease for which it is seeking approval (where  effective  means only that the drug performed better than placebo or competitors in at least two trials). the drug must meet safety criteria by being subject to animal and controlled human testing.gaining fda approval usually takes several years. testing done on animals must be extensive and must include several species to help in the evaluation of both the effectiveness and toxicity of the drug. the dosage of any drug approved for use is intended to fall within a range in which the drug produces a therapeutic effect or desired outcome.the safety and effectiveness of prescription drugs in the u.s. is regulated by the federal prescription drug marketing act of 1987. the medicines and healthcare products regulatory agency (mhra) has a similar role in the uk. medicare part d is a prescription drug plan in the u.s. the prescription drug marketing act (pdma) is an act related to drug policy. prescription drugs are drugs regulated by legislation.   == societies and education ==   === societies and administration === the international union of basic and
clinical pharmacology  federation of european pharmacological societies and european association for clinical pharmacology and therapeutics are an organisations representing standardisation and regulation of clinical and scientific pharmacology. systems for medical classification of drugs with pharmaceutical codes have been developed. these include the national drug code (ndc)  administered by food and drug administration.  drug identification number (din)  administered by health canada under the food and drugs act  hong kong drug registration  administered by the pharmaceutical service of the department of health (hong kong) and national pharmaceutical product index in south africa. hierarchical systems have also been developed  including the anatomical therapeutic chemical classification system (at  or atc/ddd)  administered by world health organization  generic product identifier (gpi)  a hierarchical classification number published by medispan and snomed  c axis. ingredients of drugs have been categorised by unique ingredient identifier.   === education ===  the study of pharmacology overlaps with biomedical sciences and is study of the effects of drugs on living organisms. pharmacological research can lead to new drug discoveries  and promote a better understanding of human physiology. students of pharmacology must have detailed working knowledge of aspects in physiology  pathology and chemistry. modern pharmacology is interdisciplinary and relates to biophysical and computational sciences  and analytical chemistry. whereas a pharmacy student will eventually work in a pharmacy dispensing medications  a pharmacologist will typically work within a laboratory setting. pharmacological research is important in academic research (medical and non-medical)  private industrial positions  science writing  scientific patents and law  consultation  biotech and pharmaceutical employment  the alcohol industry  food industry  forensics/law enforcement  public health  and environmental/ecological sciences. pharmacology is often taught to pharmacy and medicine students as part of a medical school curriculum.   == see also ==   == references ==   == external links == american society for pharmacology and experimental therapeutics british pharmacological society international conference on harmonisation us pharmacopeia international union of basic and clinical pharmacology iuphar committee on receptor nomenclature and drug classification iuphar/bps guide to pharmacology   == further reading == foreman  john c.  johansen  torben  gibb  alasdair j. (2009). textbook of receptor pharmacology  second edition. crc press. brunton  laurence (2011).  brunton  l. l.  chabner  bruce  knollmann  björn c. (eds.). goodman and gilman s the pharmacological basis of therapeutics (12 ed.). new york  mcgraw-hill. isbn 978-0-07-162442-8.whalen  karen (2014). lippincott illustrated reviews  pharmacology.
apothecary () is one term for a medical professional who formulates and dispenses materia medica (medicine) to physicians  surgeons  and patients. the modern pharmacist (also colloquially referred to as a chemist in british english) has taken over this role. in some languages and regions  the word  apothecary  is still used to refer to a retail pharmacy or a pharmacist who owns one. apothecaries  investigation of herbal and chemical ingredients was a precursor to the modern sciences of chemistry and pharmacology.in addition to dispensing herbs and medicine  the apothecary offered general medical advice and a range of services that are now performed by other specialist practitioners  such as surgeons and obstetricians. apothecary shops sold ingredients and the medicines they prepared wholesale to other medical practitioners  as well as dispensing them to patients. in seventeenth century england  they also controlled the trade of  tobacco which was imported as a medicine.   == etymology == apothecary derives from the ancient greek word ἀποθήκη (apothḗkē   a repository  storehouse ) via latin apotheca ( repository  storehouse  warehouse )  medieval latin apothecarius ( storekeeper )  and eventually old french apotecaire.in some languages the word  apothecary  is used to designate a pharmacist/chemist  such as german and dutch apotheker and luxembourgish apdikter. likewise   pharmacy  translates as apotek in danish  norwegian and swedish  apteekki in finnish  apoteka in bosnian  апотека in serbian  аπтека in russian  bulgarian and ukrainian  and apteka in polish. the word in indonesian is apotek  which was borrowed from the dutch apotheek. in yiddish the word is אַפּטייק apteyk. use of the term  apothecary  in the names of businesses varies with time and location.  it is generally an americanism  though some areas of the united states use it to invoke an experience of nostalgic revival and it has been used for a wide variety of businesses  while in other areas such as california its use is restricted to licensed pharmacies.   == history ==  apothecary  as a profession  could date back to 2600 bce to ancient babylon  which provides one of the earliest records of the practice of the apothecary. clay tablets were found with medical texts recording symptoms  the prescriptions  and the directions for compounding it.the papyrus ebers from ancient egypt  written around 1500 bce  contain a collection of more than 800 prescriptions  or ancient recipes for the apothecaries of the time. it mentions over 700 different drugs.the shen-nung pen ts ao ching  a chinese book on agriculture and medicinal plants (3rd century ce)  is considered a foundational material for chinese medicine and herbalism and became an important source for chinese apothecaries. the book  which documented 365 treatments  had a focus on roots and grass. it had treatments which came from minerals  roots and grass  and animals. many of the mentioned drugs and
their uses are still followed today. ginseng’s use as a sexual stimulant and aid for erectile dysfunction stems from this book. ma huang  an herb first mentioned in the book  led to the introduction of the drug ephedrine into modern medicine.according to sharif kaf al-ghazal  and s. hadzovic  apothecary shops existed during the middle ages in baghdad  operated by islamic pharmacists in 754 during the abbasid caliphate  or islamic golden age. apothecaries were also active in islamic spain by the 11th century.by the end of the 14th century  geoffrey chaucer (1342–1400) was mentioning an english apothecary in the canterbury tales  specifically  the nun s priest s tale  as pertelote speaks to chauntecleer (lines 181–184)   ... and for ye shal nat tarie  though in this toun is noon apothecarie   i shal myself to herbes techen yow   that shul been for youre hele and for youre prow.  in modern english  this can be translated as   ... and you should not linger  though in this town there is no apothecary  i shall teach you about herbs myself  that will be for your health and for your pride.   in renaissance italy  italian nuns became a prominent source for medicinal needs. at first they used their knowledge in non-curative uses in the convents to solidify the sanctity of religion among their sisters. as they progressed in skill they started to expand their field to create profit. this profit they used towards their charitable goals. because of their eventual spread to urban society  these religious women gained  roles of public significance beyond the spiritual realm (strocchia 627). later apothecaries led by nuns were spread across the italian peninsula.  from the 15th century to the 16th century  the apothecary gained the status of a skilled practitioner. in england  the apothecaries merited their own livery company  the worshipful society of apothecaries  founded in 1617. its roots  however  go back much earlier to the guild of pepperers formed in london in 1180.  however  there were ongoing tensions between apothecaries and other medical professions  as is illustrated by the experiences of susan reeve lyon and other women apothecaries in 17th century london. often women (who were prohibited from entering medical school) became apothecaries which took away business from male physicians. in 1865 elizabeth garrett anderson became the first woman to be licensed to practice medicine in britain by passing the examination of the society of apothecaries.  by the end of the 19th century  the medical professions had taken on their current institutional form  with defined roles for physicians and surgeons  and the role of the apothecary was more narrowly conceived  as that of pharmacist (dispensing chemist in british english).in german speaking countries  such as germany  austria and switzerland  pharmacies or chemist stores are still called apothecaries or in german apotheken. the apotheke ( store )
is legally obligated to be run at all times by at least one apotheker (male) or apothekerin (female)  who actually has an academic degree as a pharmacist —— in german pharmazeut (male) or pharmazeutin (female) — and has obtained the professional title apotheker by either working in the field for numerous years — usually working in a pharmacy store — or taking additional exams. thus a pharmazeut is not always an apotheker. magdalena neff became the first woman to gain a medical qualification in germany when she studied pharmacy at the technical university of kalsruhe and later passed the apothecary s examination in 1906.apothecaries used their own measurement system  the apothecaries  system  to provide precise weighing of small quantities. apothecaries dispensed vials of poisons as well as medicines  and as is still the case  medicines could be either beneficial or harmful if inappropriately used. protective methods to prevent accidental ingestion of poisons included the use of specially shaped containers for potentially poisonous substances such as laudanum.   === apothecary work as gateway to women as healers === apothecary businesses were typically family-run  and wives or other women of the family worked alongside their husbands in the shops  learning the trade themselves. women were still not allowed to train and be educated in universities so this allowed them a chance to be trained in medical knowledge and healing. previously  women had some influence in other women s healthcare  such as serving as midwives and other feminine care in a setting that was not considered appropriate for males. though physicians gave medical advice  they did not make medicine  so they typically sent their patients to particular independent apothecaries  who did also provide some medical advice in particular remedies and healing.   == methods ==   === recipes === many recipes included herbs  minerals  and pieces of animals (meats  fats  skins) that were ingested  made into paste for external use  or used as aromatherapy. some of these are similar to natural remedies used today  including catnip  chamomile  fennel  mint  garlic  and witch hazel. many other ingredients used in the past such as urine  fecal matter  earwax  human fat  and saliva  are no longer used and are generally considered ineffective or unsanitary. trial and  error were the main source or finding successful remedies  as little was known about the chemistry of why certain treatments worked. for instance  it was known that drinking coffee could help cure headaches  but the existence and properties of caffeine itself was still a mystery.   == other mentions in literature and pop culture == william shakespeare s play  romeo and juliet    a poor apothecary sells romeo an elixir of death with which romeo commits suicide to be with juliet  whom he believes to be dead. william shakespeare s play  king lear  king lear exclaims  
give me an ounce of civet  good apothecary  to sweeten my imagination.  the character of mr perry in jane austen s novel emma performs many of the functions of a doctor. william faulkner s story  a rose for emily    the main character  miss emily grierson  goes to an  apothecary  and buys arsenic  supposedly to kill a rat. which turns out later to have been her  yankee boyfriend  who had sought to cast her aside harshly. in the warhammer 40k universe  space marines who practice battlefield medicine are known as apothecaries. in the turn-based role-playing video game octopath traveler  alfyn greengrass  one of the playable characters  is an apothecary. in j.k. rowling s harry potter series  the wizarding shops that sell ingredients for potions are known as apothecaries. the author ingrid noll wrote the bestseller german book  die apothekerin  which was translated to  the pharmacist  in english. the monk cadfael in the cadfael chronicles written by the linguist-scholar edith pargeter under the name  ellis peters  is an apothecary  herbalist  and amateur detective.   == noted apothecaries ==   == see also ==  compounding herb garden herbalism history of pharmacy worshipful society of apothecaries alchemy pharmacist   == references ==   == external links ==  on keeping shop  a guidebook for preparing orders  is a book  in arabic  from 1260 that extensively discusses the art of being an apothecary
a film producer is a person who oversees film production. either employed by a production company or working independently  producers plan and coordinate various aspects of film production  such as selecting the script  coordinating writing  directing  and editing  and arranging financing.during the  discovery stage  the producer finds and selects promising material for development. then  unless the film is based on an existing script  the producer has to hire a screenwriter and oversee the development of the script. once a script is completed  the producer will lead a pitch to secure the financial backing (a  green light ) to allow production to begin. the producer also supervises the pre-production  production  and post-production stages of filmmaking. one of the most important tasks is to hire the director and other key crew members. whereas the director makes the creative decisions during the production  the producer typically manages the logistics and business operations  though some directors also produce their own films. the producer is tasked with making sure the film is delivered on time and within budget  and has the final say on creative decisions. finally  the producer will oversee the marketing and distribution. for various reasons  producers cannot always supervise all of the production. in this case  the main producer or executive producer may hire and delegate work to associate producers  assistant producers  line producers or unit production managers.   == types == different types of producers and their roles within the industry today include    === executive producer ===  the executive producer oversees all of the other producers working on the same project. they make sure that the producers are fulfilling their roles on the given production. they can also be in charge of managing the film s finances and handling all other business aspects of the film.   === line producer ===  the line producer manages the staff and day-to-day operations and oversees each and every physical aspect that is involved in the making of a film or television program. the line producer can be credited as  produced by  in certain cases.   === supervising producer === the supervising producer supervises the creative process of screenplay development and often aids in script re-writes. they can also fulfill the executive producer s role of overseeing other producers.   === producer === within the production process  a producer can oversee  arrange  manage  and begin every single aspect. they are involved in every single stage of the overall production process.   === co-producer === a co-producer is a member of a team of producers that perform all of the functions and roles that a single producer would have in a single given project.   === coordinating producer or production coordinator ===  a coordinating producer coordinates the work/role of multiple producers who are trying to achieve a shared result.   === associate producer or assistant producer ===
the associate or assistant producer helps the producer during the production process. they can sometimes be involved in coordinating others  jobs  such as creating peoples  schedules and hiring the main talent.   === segment producer === a segment producer produces one or more single specific segments of a multi-segment film or television production.   === field producer === a field producer helps the producer by overseeing all of the production that takes place outside of the studio in specific locations for the film.   == responsibilities ==   === development and pre-production ===  during this stage of the production process  producers bring together people like the film director  cinematographer  and production designer. unless the film is supposed to be based on an original script  the producer has to find an appropriate screenwriter. if an existing script is considered flawed  they are able to order a new version or make the decision to hire a script doctor. the producer also has the final say on hiring the film director  cast members  and other staff. in some cases  they also have the last word when it comes to casting questions. a producer s role will also consist of approving locations  the studio hire  the final shooting script  the production schedule  and the budget. more time and money spent in pre-production can reduce the time and money wasted during production time.   === production ===  during production  the producer s job is to make sure the film stays on schedule and under budget. they will always be in contact with directors and other key creative team members.for various reasons  producers cannot always personally supervise all parts of their production. for example  some producers run a company which also deals with film distribution. also  cast and film crew often work at different times and places  and certain films even require a second unit.   === post-production ===  during post-production  the producer has the last word on whether sounds  music  or scenes have to be changed or cut. even if the shooting has been finished  the producers can still demand that additional scenes be filmed. in the case of a negative test screening  producers may even demand and get an alternative film ending. for example  the audience reacted very negatively to rambo’s death in the test screening for the film first blood  and the producers requested that the cast and crew shoot a new ending. producers also oversee the sales  marketing and distribution rights of the film  often working with specialist third-party firms.   == the union == within the united states film and television industry  all producers union contracts are negotiated by the alliance of motion picture and television producers (amptp). it was founded in 1924 by the u.s trade association as the association of motion picture producers. the amptp was originally responsible for negotiating labor
contracts  but during the mid-1930s it took over all contract negotiation responsibilities previously controlled by the academy of motion picture arts and sciences.  today  the amptp negotiates with various industry associations when dealing with producers union contracts  including the american federation of television and radio artists (aftra)  the directors guild of america  (dga)  and the screen actors guild (sag). in 2012  the amptp negotiated over eighty industry-wide union agreements on behalf of 350 producers. since 1982  the ampt has been responsible for negotiating these union agreements and it’s now considered the official contract negotiation representative for everyone within the industry.   == career process == there are many different ways to become a film producer. stanley kramer started as an editor and writer  while other producers started as actors or directors.however  most producers start in a college  university or film school. on the occasion of announcing his own film school   école de la cité  film producer luc besson admitted that at the beginning of his career  he would have appreciated the chance to attend a film school. film schools and many universities offer degree courses that include film production knowledge  with some courses that are especially designed for future film producers. these courses focus on key topics like pitching  script development  script assessment  shooting schedule design  and budgeting. students can also expect practical training regarding post-production. training at a top producing school is one of the most efficient ways a student can show professionals they are not a rookie.while education is one way to begin a career as a film producer  experience is also required to land a job. internships are a great way to gain experience while in school and give students a solid foundation on which to build their career. many internships are paid  which enable students to earn money while gaining hands-on skills from industry professionals. through internships  students get to network with people in the film industry as well. this pays off in the end when looking for jobs after school. once an internship is over  the next step typically will be to land a junior position  such as a production assistant.although rates can vary based on a producer s role and the location of filming  the average salary can start anywhere from $20 000 to $70 000  even doubling when working in los angeles. the average annual salary for a producer in the u.s. is $109 844. when examining more than 15 000 producers in the los angeles metropolitan area  the average annual salary is $138 640. producers can also have an agreement to take a percentage of a movie s sales.there is no average work day for a film producer  since their tasks are changing from day to day. a producer s work hours are often irregular and can consist of very long days with the possibility of working nights and weekends.   ==
see also == list of highest-grossing producers   == references ==   == further reading ==   == external links ==  media related to film producers at wikimedia commons
filmmaking (or  in an academic context  film production) is the process of making a film  generally in the sense of films intended for extensive theatrical exhibition. filmmaking involves a number of discrete stages including an initial story  idea  or commission  through screenwriting  casting  shooting  sound recording and pre-production  editing  and screening the finished product before an audience that may result in a film release and exhibition. filmmaking takes place in many places around the world in a range of economic  social  and political contexts  and using a variety of technologies and cinematic techniques. typically  it involves many people  and can take from a few months to several years to complete.   == stages of production == film production consists of five major stages  development  the first stage in which the ideas for the film are created  rights to books/plays are bought etc.  and the screenplay is written. financing for the project has to be sought and obtained. pre-production  arrangements and preparations are made for the shoot  such as hiring cast and film crew  selecting locations and constructing sets. production  the raw footage and other elements for the film are recorded during the film shoot. post-production  the images  sound  and visual effects of the recorded film are edited and combined into a finished product. distribution  the completed film is distributed  marketed  and screened in cinemas and/or released to home video.   === development === in this stage  the project producer selects a story  which may come from a book  play  another film  true story  video game  comic book  graphic novel  or an original idea  etc. after identifying a theme or underlying message  the producer works with writers to prepare a synopsis. next they produce a step outline  which breaks the story down into one-paragraph scenes that concentrate on dramatic structure.  then  they prepare a treatment  a 25-to-30-page description of the story  its mood  and characters. this usually has little dialogue and stage direction  but often contains drawings that help visualize key points. another way is to produce a scriptment once a synopsis is produced. next  a screenwriter writes a screenplay over a period of several months. the screenwriter may rewrite it several times to improve dramatization  clarity  structure  characters  dialogue  and overall style. however  producers often skip the previous steps and develop submitted screenplays which investors  studios  and other interested parties assess through a process called script coverage. a film distributor may be contacted at an early stage to assess the likely market and potential financial success of the film. hollywood distributors adopt a hard-headed no approach and consider factors such as the film genre  the target audience and assumed audience  the historical success of similar films  the actors who might
appear in the film  and potential directors. all these factors imply a certain appeal of the film to a possible audience. not all films make a profit from the theatrical release alone  so film companies take dvd sales and worldwide distribution rights into account. the producer and screenwriter prepare a film pitch  or treatment  and present it to potential financiers. they will also pitch the film to actors and directors (especially so-called bankable stars) in order to  attach  them to the project (that is  obtain a binding promise to work on the film if financing is ever secured). many projects fail to move beyond this stage and enter so-called development hell. if a pitch succeeds  a film receives a  green light  meaning someone offers financial backing  typically a major film studio  film council  or independent investor. the parties involved negotiate a deal and sign contracts. once all parties have met and the deal has been set  the film may proceed into the pre-production period. by this stage  the film should have a clearly defined marketing strategy and target audience. development of animated films differs slightly in that it is the director who develops and pitches a story to an executive producer on the basis of rough storyboards  and it is rare for a full-length screenplay to already exist at that point in time.  if the film is green-lighted for further development and pre-production  then a screenwriter is later brought in to prepare the screenplay. analogous to most any business venture  financing of a film project deals with the study of filmmaking as the management and procurement of investments. it includes the dynamics of assets that are required to fund the filmmaking and liabilities incurred during the filmmaking over  the time period from early development through the management of profits and losses after distribution under conditions of different degrees of uncertainty and risk. the practical aspects of filmmaking finance can also be defined as the science of the money management of all phases involved in filmmaking. film finance aims to price assets based on their risk level and their expected rate of return based upon anticipated profits and protection against losses.   === pre-production ===  in pre-production  every step of actually creating the film is carefully designed and planned. the production company is created and a production office established. the film is pre-visualized by the director  and may be storyboarded with the help of illustrators and concept artists. a production budget is drawn up to plan expenditures for the film.  for major productions  insurance is procured to protect against accidents. the nature of the film  and the budget  determine the size and type of crew used during filmmaking. many hollywood blockbusters employ a cast and crew of hundreds  while a low-budget  independent film may be made by a skeleton crew of eight or nine (or fewer). these are typical crew positions  
storyboard artist  creates visual images to help the director and production designer communicate their ideas to the production team. director  is primarily responsible for the storytelling  creative decisions and acting of the film. assistant director (ad)  manages the shooting schedule and logistics of the production  among other tasks.  there are several types of ad  each with different responsibilities. film producer  hires the film s crew. unit production manager  manages the production budget and production schedule. they also report  on behalf of the production office  to the studio executives or financiers of the film. location manager  finds and manages film locations. nearly all pictures feature segments that are shot in the controllable environment of a studio sound stage  while outdoor sequences call for filming on location. production designer  the one who creates the visual conception of the film  working with the art director  who manages the art department  which makes production sets.costume designer  creates the clothing for the characters in the film working closely with the actors  as well as other departments. makeup and hair designer  works closely with the costume designer in order to create a certain look for a character. casting director  finds actors to fill the parts in the script. this normally requires that actors part-take in an audition  either live in front of the casting director or in front of a camera  or multiple cameras. choreographer  creates and coordinates the movement and dance – typically for musicals.  some films also credit a fight choreographer. director of photography (dop)  the head of the photography of the entire film  supervises all cinematographers and camera operators. production sound mixer  the head of the sound department during the production stage of filmmaking. they record and mix the audio on set – dialogue  presence and sound effects in mono and ambience in stereo. they work with the boom operator  director  da  dp  and first ad. sound designer  creates the aural conception of the film  working with the supervising sound editor. on bollywood-style indian productions the sound designer plays the role of a director of audiography. composer  creates new music for the film. (usually not until post-production)   === production ===  in production  the film is created and shot. more crew will be recruited at this stage  such as the property master  script supervisor  assistant directors  stills photographer  picture editor  and sound editors. these are just the most common roles in filmmaking  the production office will be free to create any unique blend of roles to suit the various responsibilities possible during the production of a film. a typical day shooting  begins with the crew arriving on the set/location by their call time. actors usually have their own separate call times. since set construction  dressing and lighting can take many hours or even days  they are
often set up in advance. the grip  electric and production design crews are typically a step ahead of the camera and sound departments  for efficiency s sake  while a scene is being filmed  they are already preparing the next one. while the crew prepare their equipment  the actors do their costumes and attend the hair and make-up departments. the actors rehearse the script and blocking with the director  and the camera and sound crews rehearse with them and make final tweaks. finally  the action is shot in as many takes as the director wishes. most american productions follow a specific procedure  the assistant director (ad) calls  picture is up  to inform everyone that a take is about to be recorded  and then  quiet  everyone  once everyone is ready to shoot  the ad calls  roll sound  (if the take involves sound)  and the production sound mixer will start their equipment  record a verbal slate of the take s information  and announce  sound speed  or just  speed  when they are ready. the ad follows with  roll camera  answered by  speed  by the camera operator once the camera is recording. the clapper  who is already in front of the camera with the clapperboard  calls  marker  and slaps it shut. if the take involves extras or background action  the ad will cue them ( action background )  and last is the director  telling the actors  action . the ad may echo  action  louder on large sets. a take is over when the director calls  cut  and the camera and sound stop recording. the script supervisor will note any continuity issues  and the sound and camera teams log technical notes for the take on their respective report sheets. if the director decides additional takes are required  the whole process repeats. once satisfied  the crew moves on to the next camera angle or  setup  until the whole scene is  covered.  when shooting is finished for the scene  the assistant director declares a  wrap  or  moving on  and the crew will  strike  or dismantle  the set for that scene. at the end of the day  the director approves the next day s shooting schedule and a daily progress report is sent to the production office. this includes the report sheets from continuity  sound  and camera teams. call sheets are distributed to the cast and crew to tell them when and where to turn up the next shooting day. later on  the director  producer  other department heads  and  sometimes  the cast  may gather to watch that day or yesterday s footage  called dailies  and review their work. with workdays often lasting 14 or 18 hours in remote locations  film production tends to
create a team spirit. when the entire film is in the can  or in the completion of the production phase  it is customary for the production office to arrange a wrap party  to thank all the cast and crew for their efforts. for the production phase on live-action films  synchronizing work schedules of key cast and crew members is very important  since for many scenes  several cast members and most of the crew  must be physically present at the same place at the same time (and bankable stars may need to rush from one project to another). animated films have different workflow at the production phase  in that voice talent can record their takes in the recording studio at different times and may not see one another until the film s premiere  while most physical live-action tasks are either unnecessary or are simulated by various types of animators.   === post-production ===  here the video/film is assembled by the film editor. the shot film material is edited. the production sound (dialogue) is also edited  music tracks and songs are composed and recorded   if a film is sought to have a score  sound effects are designed and recorded. any computer-graphic visual effects are digitally added by an artist. finally  all sound elements are mixed into  stems  which are then married to picture  and the film is fully completed ( locked ).   === distribution ===  this is the final stage  where the film is released to cinemas or  occasionally  directly to consumer media (vhs  vcd  dvd  blu-ray) or direct download from a digital media provider. the film is duplicated as required (either onto film or hard disk drives) and distributed to cinemas for exhibition (screening).  press kits  posters  and other advertising materials are published  and the film is advertised and promoted.  a b-roll clip may be released to the press based on raw footage shot for a  making of  documentary  which may include making-of clips as well as on-set interviews. film distributors usually release a film with a launch party  a red-carpet premiere  press releases  interviews with the press  press preview screenings  and film festival screenings. most films are also promoted with their own special website separate from those of the production company or distributor. for major films  key personnel are often contractually required to participate in promotional tours in which they appear at premieres and festivals  and sit for interviews with many tv  print  and online journalists.  the largest productions may require more than one promotional tour  in order to rejuvenate audience demand at each release window. since the advent of home video in the early 1980s  most major films have followed a pattern of having several distinct release windows.  a film may first be released to a few select cinemas  or if
it tests well enough  may go directly into wide release.  next  it is released  normally at different times several weeks (or months) apart  into different market segments like rental  retail  pay-per-view  in-flight entertainment  cable  satellite  or free-to-air broadcast television. the distribution rights for the film are also usually sold for worldwide distribution. the distributor and the production company share profits and manage losses.   == independent filmmaking ==  filmmaking also takes place outside of the mainstream and is commonly called independent filmmaking. since the introduction of dv technology  the means of production have become more democratized and economically viable. filmmakers can conceivably shoot and edit a film  create and edit the sound and music  and mix the final cut on a home computer. however  while the means of production may be democratized  financing  traditional distribution  and marketing remain difficult to accomplish outside the traditional system. in the past  most independent filmmakers have relied on film festivals (such as sundance  venice  cannes and toronto film festivals) to get their films noticed and sold for distribution and production. however  the internet has allowed for relatively inexpensive distribution of independent films on websites such as youtube. as a result  several companies have emerged to assist filmmakers in getting independent movies seen and sold via mainstream internet marketplaces  often adjacent to popular hollywood titles. with internet movie distribution  independent filmmakers who choose to forgo a traditional distribution deal now have the ability to reach global audiences.   == see also ==   == references ==   == external links == filmmaking at curlie internet filmmaker s faq filmmaker magazine directors  diaries  the road to their first film
a bank is a financial institution that accepts deposits from the public and creates credit. lending activities can be performed either directly or indirectly through capital markets. due to their importance in the financial stability of a country  banks are highly regulated in most countries. most nations have institutionalized a system known as fractional reserve banking under which banks hold liquid assets equal to only a portion of their current liabilities. in addition to other regulations intended to ensure liquidity  banks are generally subject to minimum capital requirements based on an international set of capital standards  known as the basel accords. banking in its modern sense evolved in the 14th century in the prosperous cities of renaissance italy but in many ways was a continuation of ideas and concepts of credit and lending that had their roots in the ancient world. in the history of banking  a number of banking dynasties – notably  the medicis  the fuggers  the welsers  the berenbergs  and the rothschilds – have played a central role over many centuries. the oldest existing retail bank is banca monte dei paschi di siena  while the oldest existing merchant bank is berenberg bank.   == history ==  the concept of banking may have begun in ancient babylonia and old sangvi  with merchants offering loans of grain as collateral within a barter system. lenders in ancient greece and during the roman empire added two important innovations  they accepted deposits and changed money. archaeology from this period in ancient china and india also shows evidence of money lending. more modern banking can be traced to medieval and early renaissance italy  to the rich cities in the centre and north like florence  lucca  siena  venice and genoa. the bardi and peruzzi families dominated banking in 14th-century florence  establishing branches in many other parts of europe. one of the most famous italian banks was the medici bank  set up by giovanni di bicci de  medici in 1397. the earliest known state deposit bank  banco di san giorgio (bank of st. george)  was founded in 1407 at genoa  italy.modern banking practices  including fractional reserve banking and the issue of banknotes  emerged in the 17th and 18th centuries. merchants started to store their gold with the goldsmiths of london  who possessed private vaults  and charged a fee for that service. in exchange for each deposit of precious metal  the goldsmiths issued receipts certifying the quantity and purity of the metal they held as a bailee  these receipts could not be assigned  only the original depositor could collect the stored goods.  gradually the goldsmiths began to lend the money out on behalf of the depositor  which led to the development of modern banking practices  promissory notes (which evolved into banknotes) were issued for money deposited as a loan to the goldsmith. the goldsmith paid interest on these deposits. since the promissory notes were payable
on demand  and the advances (loans) to the goldsmith s customers were repayable over a longer time period  this was an early form of fractional reserve banking. the promissory notes developed into an assignable instrument which could circulate as a safe and convenient form of money backed by the goldsmith s promise to pay  allowing goldsmiths to advance loans with little risk of default. thus  the goldsmiths of london became the forerunners of banking by creating new money based on credit. the bank of england was the first to begin the permanent issue of banknotes  in 1695. the royal bank of scotland established the first overdraft facility in 1728. by the beginning of the 19th century a bankers  clearing house was established in london to allow multiple banks to clear transactions. the rothschilds pioneered international finance on a large scale  financing the purchase of the suez canal for the british government.   == etymology == the word  bank was taken middle english from middle french banque  from old italian banco  meaning  table  from old high german banc  bank  bench  counter . benches were used as makeshift desks or exchange counters during the renaissance by jewish florentine bankers  who used to make their transactions atop desks covered by green tablecloths.   == definition == the definition of a bank varies from country to country. see the relevant country pages for more information. under english common law  a banker is defined as a person who carries on the business of banking by conducting current accounts for his customers  paying cheques drawn on him/her and also collecting cheques for his/her customers.  in most common law jurisdictions there is a bills of exchange act that codifies the law in relation to negotiable instruments  including cheques  and this act contains a statutory definition of the term banker  banker includes a body of persons  whether incorporated or not  who carry on the business of banking  (section 2  interpretation). although this definition seems circular  it is actually functional  because it ensures that the legal basis for bank transactions such as cheques does not depend on how the bank is structured or regulated. the business of banking is in many english common law countries not defined by statute but by common law  the definition above. in other english common law jurisdictions there are statutory definitions of the business of banking or banking business. when looking at these definitions it is important to keep in mind that they are defining the business of banking for the purposes of the legislation  and not necessarily in general. in particular  most of the definitions are from legislation that has the purpose of regulating and supervising banks rather than regulating the actual business of banking. however  in many cases the statutory definition closely mirrors the common law one. examples of statutory definitions    banking business  means the business
of receiving money on current or deposit account  paying and collecting cheques drawn by or paid in by customers  the making of advances to customers  and includes such other business as the authority may prescribe for the purposes of this act  (banking act (singapore)  section 2  interpretation).  banking business  means the business of either or both of the following receiving from the general public money on current  deposit  savings or other similar account repayable on demand or within less than [3 months] ... or with a period of call or notice of less than that period  paying or collecting cheques drawn by or paid in by customers.since the advent of eftpos (electronic funds transfer at point of sale)  direct credit  direct debit and internet banking  the cheque has lost its primacy in most banking systems as a payment instrument. this has led legal theorists to suggest that the cheque based definition should be broadened to include financial institutions that conduct current accounts for customers and enable customers to pay and be paid by third parties  even if they do not pay and collect cheques .   === standard business ===  banks act as payment agents by conducting checking or current accounts for customers  paying cheques drawn by customers in the bank  and collecting cheques deposited to customers  current accounts. banks also enable customer payments via other payment methods such as automated clearing house (ach)  wire transfers or telegraphic transfer  eftpos  and automated teller machines (atms). banks borrow money by accepting funds deposited on current accounts  by accepting term deposits  and by issuing debt securities such as banknotes and bonds. banks lend money by making advances to customers on current accounts  by making installment loans  and by investing in marketable debt securities and other forms of money lending. banks provide different payment services  and a bank account is considered indispensable by most businesses and individuals. non-banks that provide payment services such as remittance companies are normally not considered as an adequate substitute for a bank account. banks can create new money when they make a loan. new loans throughout the banking system generate new deposits elsewhere in the system. the money supply is usually increased by the act of lending  and reduced when loans are repaid faster than new ones are generated. in the united kingdom between 1997 and 2007  there was an increase in the money supply  largely caused by much more bank lending  which served to push up property prices and increase private debt. the amount of money in the economy as measured by m4 in the uk went from £750 billion to £1700 billion between 1997 and 2007  much of the increase caused by bank lending. if all the banks increase their lending together  then they can expect new deposits to return to them and the amount of money in the economy will increase. excessive or
risky lending can cause borrowers to default  the banks then become more cautious  so there is less lending and therefore less money so that the economy can go from boom to bust as happened in the uk and many other western economies after 2007.   === range of activities === activities undertaken by banks include personal banking  corporate banking  investment banking  private banking  transaction banking  insurance  consumer finance  foreign exchange trading  commodity trading  trading in equities  futures and options trading and money market trading.   === channels ===  banks offer many different channels to access their banking and other services   branch  in-person banking in a retail location automated teller machine banking adjacent to or remote from the bank bank by mail  most banks accept cheque deposits via mail and use mail to communicate to their customers online banking over the internet to perform multiple types of transactions mobile banking is using one s mobile phone to conduct banking transactions telephone banking allows customers to conduct transactions over the telephone with an automated attendant  or when requested  with a telephone operator video banking performs banking transactions or professional banking consultations via a remote video and audio connection. video banking can be performed via purpose built banking transaction machines (similar to an automated teller machine) or via a video conference enabled bank branch clarification relationship manager  mostly for private banking or business banking  who visits customers at their homes or businesses direct selling agent  who works for the bank based on a contract  whose main job is to increase the customer base for the bank   === business models === a bank can generate revenue in a variety of different ways including interest  transaction fees and financial advice. traditionally  the most significant method is via charging interest on the capital it lends out to customers. the bank profits from the difference between the level of interest it pays for deposits and other sources of funds  and the level of interest it charges in its lending activities. this difference is referred to as the spread between the cost of funds and the loan interest rate. historically  profitability from lending activities has been cyclical and dependent on the needs and strengths of loan customers and the stage of the economic cycle. fees and financial advice constitute a more stable revenue stream and banks have therefore placed more emphasis on these revenue lines to smooth their financial performance. in the past 20 years  american banks have taken many measures to ensure that they remain profitable while responding to increasingly changing market conditions.  first  this includes the gramm–leach–bliley act  which allows banks again to merge with investment and insurance houses. merging banking  investment  and insurance functions allows traditional banks to respond to increasing consumer demands for  one-stop shopping  by enabling cross-selling of products (which  the banks hope  will
also increase profitability). second  they have expanded the use of risk-based pricing from business lending to consumer lending  which means charging higher interest rates to those customers that are considered to be a higher credit risk and thus increased chance of default on loans. this helps to offset the losses from bad loans  lowers the price of loans to those who have better credit histories  and offers credit products to high risk customers who would otherwise be denied credit. third  they have sought to increase the methods of payment processing available to the general public and business clients. these products include debit cards  prepaid cards  smart cards  and credit cards. they make it easier for consumers to conveniently make transactions and smooth their consumption over time (in some countries with underdeveloped financial systems  it is still common to deal strictly in cash  including carrying suitcases filled with cash to purchase a home).however  with the convenience of easy credit  there is also increased risk that consumers will mismanage their financial resources and accumulate excessive debt. banks make money from card products through interest charges and fees charged to cardholders  and transaction fees to retailers who accept the bank s credit and/or debit cards for payments.this helps in making a profit and facilitates economic development as a whole.recently  as banks have been faced with pressure from fintechs  new and additional business models have been suggested such as freemium  monetization of data  white-labeling of banking and payment applications  or the cross-selling of complementary products.   === products ===   ==== retail ==== savings account recurring deposit account fixed deposit account money market account certificate of deposit (cd) individual retirement account (ira) credit card debit card mortgage mutual fund personal loan time deposits atm card current accounts cheque books automated teller machine (atm)   ==== business (or commercial/investment) banking ==== business loan capital raising (equity / debt / hybrids) revolving credit risk management (foreign exchange (fx))  interest rates  commodities  derivatives term loan cash management services (lock box  remote deposit capture  merchant processing) credit services   == capital and risk == banks face a number of risks in order to conduct their business  and how well these risks are managed and understood is a key driver behind profitability  and how much capital a bank is required to hold. bank capital consists principally of equity  retained earnings and subordinated debt. after the 2007-2009 financial crisis  regulators force banks to issue contingent convertible bonds (cocos).these are hybrid capital securities that absorb losses in accordance with their contractual terms when the capital of the issuing bank falls below a certain level. then debt is reduced and bank capitalization gets a boost. owing to their capacity to absorb losses  cocos have the potential to satisfy regulatory capital requirement.some of the main risks faced by banks include   credit risk  risk of loss arising from a borrower who
does not make payments as promised. liquidity risk  risk that a given security or asset cannot be traded quickly enough in the market to prevent a loss (or make the required profit). market risk  risk that the value of a portfolio  either an investment portfolio or a trading portfolio  will decrease due to the change in value of the market risk factors. operational risk  risk arising from execution of a company s business functions. reputational risk  a type of risk related to the trustworthiness of business. macroeconomic risk  risks related to the aggregate economy the bank is operating in.the capital requirement is a bank regulation  which sets a framework within which a bank or depository institution must manage its balance sheet. the categorization of assets and capital is highly standardized so that it can be risk weighted.   == banks in the economy ==   === economic functions === the economic functions of banks include   issue of money  in the form of banknotes and current accounts subject to cheque or payment at the customer s order. these claims on banks can act as money because they are negotiable or repayable on demand  and hence valued at par. they are effectively transferable by mere delivery  in the case of banknotes  or by drawing a cheque that the payee may bank or cash. netting and settlement of payments – banks act as both collection and paying agents for customers  participating in interbank clearing and settlement systems to collect  present  be presented with  and pay payment instruments. this enables banks to economize on reserves held for settlement of payments  since inward and outward payments offset each other. it also enables the offsetting of payment flows between geographical areas  reducing the cost of settlement between them. credit intermediation – banks borrow and lend back-to-back on their own account as middle men. credit quality improvement – banks lend money to ordinary commercial and personal borrowers (ordinary credit quality)  but are high quality borrowers. the improvement comes from diversification of the bank s assets and capital which provides a buffer to absorb losses without defaulting on its obligations. however  banknotes and deposits are generally unsecured  if the bank gets into difficulty and pledges assets as security  to raise the funding it needs to continue to operate  this puts the note holders and depositors in an economically subordinated position. asset liability mismatch/maturity transformation – banks borrow more on demand debt and short term debt  but provide more long term loans. in other words  they borrow short and lend long. with a stronger credit quality than most other borrowers  banks can do this by aggregating issues (e.g. accepting deposits and issuing banknotes) and redemptions (e.g. withdrawals and redemption of banknotes)  maintaining reserves of cash  investing in marketable securities that can be readily converted to cash if needed  and raising replacement funding as needed from various sources (e.g.
wholesale cash markets and securities markets). money creation/destruction – whenever a bank gives out a loan in a fractional-reserve banking system  a new sum of money is created and conversely  whenever the principal on that loan is repaid money is destroyed.   == bank crisis ==  banks are susceptible to many forms of risk which have triggered occasional systemic crises. these include liquidity risk (where many depositors may request withdrawals in excess of available funds)  credit risk (the chance that those who owe money to the bank will not repay it)  and interest rate risk (the possibility that the bank will become unprofitable  if rising interest rates force it to pay relatively more on its deposits than it receives on its loans). banking crises have developed many times throughout history when one or more risks have emerged for a banking sector as a whole. prominent examples include the bank run that occurred during the great depression  the u.s. savings and loan crisis in the 1980s and early 1990s  the japanese banking crisis during the 1990s  and the sub-prime mortgage crisis in the 2000s.   === size of global banking industry === assets of the largest 1 000 banks in the world grew by 6.8% in the 2008/2009 financial year to a record us$96.4 trillion while profits declined by 85% to us$115 billion. growth in assets in adverse market conditions was largely a result of recapitalization. eu banks held the largest share of the total  56% in 2008/2009  down from 61% in the previous year. asian banks  share increased from 12% to 14% during the year  while the share of us banks increased from 11% to 13%. fee revenue generated by global investment banking totalled us$66.3 billion in 2009  up 12% on the previous year.the united states has the most banks in the world in terms of institutions (5 330 as of 2015) and possibly branches (81 607 as of 2015). this is an indicator of the geography and regulatory structure of the us  resulting in a large number of small to medium-sized institutions in its banking system. as of november 2009  china s top 4 banks have in excess of 67 000 branches (icbc 18000+  boc 12000+  ccb 13000+  abc 24000+) with an additional 140 smaller banks with an undetermined number of branches. japan had 129 banks and 12 000 branches. in 2004  germany  france  and italy each had more than 30 000 branches – more than double the 15 000 branches in the uk.   === mergers and acquisitions === between 1985 and 2018 banks engaged in around 28 798 mergers or acquisitions  either as the acquirer or the target company. the overall known value of these deals cumulates to around 5 169 bil. usd. in terms of value  there have been two major waves (1999 and 2007) which both peaked at around 460 bil. usd followed by a steep decline (-82% from 2007
until 2018). here is a list of the largest deals in history in terms of value with participation from at least one bank    == regulation ==  currently  commercial banks are regulated in most jurisdictions by government entities and require a special bank license to operate.  usually  the definition of the business of banking for the purposes of regulation is extended to include acceptance of deposits  even if they are not repayable to the customer s order – although money lending  by itself  is generally not included in the definition. unlike most other regulated industries  the regulator is typically also a participant in the market  being either a publicly or privately governed central bank. central banks also typically have a monopoly on the business of issuing banknotes. however  in some countries this is not the case. in the uk  for example  the financial services authority licenses banks  and some commercial banks (such as the bank of scotland) issue their own banknotes in addition to those issued by the bank of england  the uk government s central bank.  banking law is based on a contractual analysis of the relationship between the bank (defined above) and the customer – defined as any entity for which the bank agrees to conduct an account. the law implies rights and obligations into this relationship as follows   the bank account balance is the financial position between the bank and the customer  when the account is in credit  the bank owes the balance to the customer  when the account is overdrawn  the customer owes the balance to the bank. the bank agrees to pay the customer s checks up to the amount standing to the credit of the customer s account  plus any agreed overdraft limit. the bank may not pay from the customer s account without a mandate from the customer  e.g. a cheque drawn by the customer. the bank agrees to promptly collect the cheques deposited to the customer s account as the customer s agent  and to credit the proceeds to the customer s account. the bank has a right to combine the customer s accounts  since each account is just an aspect of the same credit relationship. the bank has a lien on cheques deposited to the customer s account  to the extent that the customer is indebted to the bank. the bank must not disclose details of transactions through the customer s account – unless the customer consents  there is a public duty to disclose  the bank s interests require it  or the law demands it. the bank must not close a customer s account without reasonable notice  since cheques are outstanding in the ordinary course of business for several days.these implied contractual terms may be modified by express agreement between the customer and the bank. the statutes and regulations in force within a particular jurisdiction may also modify the above terms
and/or create new rights  obligations or limitations relevant to the bank-customer relationship. some types of financial institution  such as building societies and credit unions  may be partly or wholly exempt from bank license requirements  and therefore regulated under separate rules. the requirements for the issue of a bank license vary between jurisdictions but typically include   minimum capital minimum capital ratio  fit and proper  requirements for the bank s controllers  owners  directors  or senior officers approval of the bank s business plan as being sufficiently prudent and plausible.   == types of banking == banks  activities can be divided into   retail banking  dealing directly with individuals and small businesses  business banking  providing services to mid-market business  corporate banking  directed at large business entities  private banking  providing wealth management services to high-net-worth individuals and families  investment banking  relating to activities on the financial markets.most banks are profit-making  private enterprises. however  some are owned by government  or are non-profit organizations.   === types of  banks ===  commercial banks  the term used for a normal bank to distinguish it from an investment bank. after the great depression  the u.s. congress required that banks only engage in banking activities  whereas investment banks were limited to capital market activities. since the two no longer have to be under separate ownership  some use the term  commercial bank  to refer to a bank or a division of a bank that mostly deals with deposits and loans from corporations or large businesses. community banks  locally operated financial institutions that empower employees to make local decisions to serve their customers and the partners. community development banks  regulated banks that provide financial services and credit to under-served markets or populations. land development banks  the special banks providing long-term loans are called land development banks (ldb). the history of ldb is quite old. the first ldb was started at jhang in punjab in 1920. the main objective of the ldbs are to promote the development of land  agriculture and increase the agricultural production. the ldbs provide long-term finance to members  directly through their branches. credit unions or co-operative banks  not-for-profit cooperatives owned by the depositors and often offering rates more favourable than for-profit banks. typically  membership is restricted to employees of a particular company  residents of a defined area  members of a certain union or religious organizations  and their immediate families. postal savings banks  savings banks associated with national postal systems. private banks  banks that manage the assets of high-net-worth individuals. historically a minimum of us$1 million was required to open an account  however  over the last years many private banks have lowered their entry hurdles to us$350 000 for private investors. offshore banks  banks located in jurisdictions with low taxation and regulation. many offshore banks are essentially private banks. savings bank 
in europe  savings banks took their roots in the 19th or sometimes even in the 18th century. their original objective was to provide easily accessible savings products to all strata of the population. in some countries  savings banks were created on public initiative  in others  socially committed individuals created foundations to put in place the necessary infrastructure. nowadays  european savings banks have kept their focus on retail banking  payments  savings products  credits and insurances for individuals or small and medium-sized enterprises. apart from this retail focus  they also differ from commercial banks by their broadly decentralized distribution network  providing local and regional outreach – and by their socially responsible approach to business and society. building societies and landesbanks  institutions that conduct retail banking. ethical banks  banks that prioritize the transparency of all operations and make only what they consider to be socially responsible investments. a direct or internet-only bank is a banking operation without any physical bank branches. transactions are usually accomplished using atms and electronic transfers and direct deposits through an online interface.   === types of investment banks === investment banks  underwrite  (guarantee the sale of) stock and bond issues  trade for their own accounts  make markets  provide investment management  and advise corporations on capital market activities such as mergers and acquisitions. merchant banks were traditionally banks which engaged in trade finance. the modern definition  however  refers to banks which provide capital to firms in the form of shares rather than loans. unlike venture caps  they tend not to invest in new companies.   === both combined ===  universal banks  more commonly known as financial services companies  engage in several of these activities. these big banks are very diversified groups that  among other services  also distribute insurance –  hence the term bancassurance  a portmanteau word combining  banque or bank  and  assurance  signifying that both banking and insurance are provided by the same corporate entity.   === other types of banks === central banks are normally government-owned and charged with quasi-regulatory responsibilities  such as supervising commercial banks  or controlling the cash interest rate. they generally provide liquidity to the banking system and act as the lender of last resort in event of a crisis. islamic banks adhere to the concepts of islamic law. this form of banking revolves around several well-established principles based on islamic canons. all banking activities must avoid interest  a concept that is forbidden in islam. instead  the bank earns profit (markup) and fees on the financing facilities that it extends to customers.   == challenges within the banking industry ==   === united states ===  the united states banking industry is one of the most heavily regulated and guarded in the world  with multiple specialized and focused regulators. all banks with fdic-insured deposits have the federal deposit insurance corporation (fdic) as a regulator. however
 for soundness examinations (i.e.  whether a bank is operating in a sound manner)  the federal reserve is the primary federal regulator for fed-member state banks  the office of the comptroller of the currency (occ) is the primary federal regulator for national banks. state non-member banks are examined by the state agencies as well as the fdic. national banks have one primary regulator – the occ. each regulatory agency has their own set of rules and regulations to which banks and thrifts must adhere. the federal financial institutions examination council (ffiec) was established in 1979 as a formal inter-agency body empowered to prescribe uniform principles  standards  and report forms for the federal examination of financial institutions. although the ffiec has resulted in a greater degree of regulatory consistency between the agencies  the rules and regulations are constantly changing. in addition to changing regulations  changes in the industry have led to consolidations within the federal reserve  fdic  ots  and occ. offices have been closed  supervisory regions have been merged  staff levels have been reduced and budgets have been cut. the remaining regulators face an increased burden with increased workload and more banks per regulator. while banks struggle to keep up with the changes in the regulatory environment  regulators struggle to manage their workload and effectively regulate their banks. the impact of these changes is that banks are receiving less hands-on assessment by the regulators  less time spent with each institution  and the potential for more problems slipping through the cracks  potentially resulting in an overall increase in bank failures across the united states. the changing economic environment has a significant impact on banks and thrifts as they struggle to effectively manage their interest rate spread in the face of low rates on loans  rate competition for deposits and the general market changes  industry trends and economic fluctuations. it has been a challenge for banks to effectively set their growth strategies with the recent economic market. a rising interest rate environment may seem to help financial institutions  but the effect of the changes on consumers and businesses is not predictable and the challenge remains for banks to grow and effectively manage the spread to generate a return to their shareholders. the management of the banks’ asset portfolios also remains a challenge in today s economic environment. loans are a bank s primary asset category and when loan quality becomes suspect  the foundation of a bank is shaken to the core. while always an issue for banks  declining asset quality has become a big problem for financial institutions.  there are several reasons for this  one of which is the lax attitude some banks have adopted because of the years of “good times.” the potential for this is exacerbated by the reduction in the regulatory oversight of banks and in some cases depth of management. problems are more likely to go undetected  resulting in a significant impact on the bank when they
are discovered. in addition  banks  like any business  struggle to cut costs and have consequently eliminated certain expenses  such as adequate employee training programs. banks also face a host of other challenges such as ageing ownership groups. across the country  many banks’ management teams and board of directors are ageing. banks also face ongoing pressure by shareholders  both public and private  to achieve earnings and growth projections. regulators place added pressure on banks to manage the various categories of risk. banking is also an extremely competitive industry. competing in the financial services industry has become tougher with the entrance of such players as insurance agencies  credit unions  cheque cashing services  credit card companies  etc. as a reaction  banks have developed their activities in financial instruments  through financial market operations such as brokerage and have become big players in such activities. another major challenge is the ageing infrastructure  also called legacy it. backend systems were built decades ago and are incompatible to new applications. fixing bugs and creating interfaces costs huge sums  as knowledgeable programmers become scarce.   === loan activities of banks === to be able to provide home buyers and builders with the funds needed  banks must compete for deposits. the phenomenon of disintermediation had to dollars moving from savings accounts and into direct market instruments such as u.s. department of treasury obligations  agency securities  and corporate debt. one of the greatest factors in recent years in the movement of deposits was the tremendous growth of money market funds whose higher interest rates attracted consumer deposits.to compete for deposits  us savings institutions offer many different types of plans  passbook or ordinary deposit accounts  –  permit any amount to be added to or withdrawn from the account at any time. now and super now accounts  –  function like checking accounts but earn interest. a minimum balance may be required on super now accounts. money market accounts  –  carry a monthly limit of preauthorized transfers to other accounts or persons and may require a minimum or average balance. certificate accounts  –  subject to loss of some or all interest on withdrawals before maturity. notice accounts  –  the equivalent of certificate accounts with an indefinite term. savers agree to notify the institution a specified time before withdrawal. individual retirement accounts (iras) and keogh plans  –  a form of retirement savings in which the funds deposited and interest earned are exempt from income tax until after withdrawal. checking accounts  –  offered by some institutions under definite restrictions. all withdrawals and deposits are completely the sole decision and responsibility of the account owner unless the parent or guardian is required to do otherwise for legal reasons. club accounts and other savings accounts  –  designed to help people save regularly to meet certain goals.   == types of accounts ==  bank statements are accounting records produced by banks
under the various accounting standards of the world. under gaap there are two kinds of accounts  debit and credit. credit accounts are revenue  equity and liabilities. debit accounts are assets and expenses. the bank credits a credit account to increase its balance  and debits a credit account to decrease its balance.the customer debits his or her savings/bank (asset) account in his ledger when making a deposit (and the account is normally in debit)  while the customer credits a credit card (liability) account in his ledger every time he spends money (and the account is normally in credit). when the customer reads his bank statement  the statement will show a credit to the account for deposits  and debits for withdrawals of funds. the customer with a positive balance will see this balance reflected as a credit balance on the bank statement. if the customer is overdrawn  he will have a negative balance  reflected as a debit balance on the bank statement.   === brokered deposits === one source of deposits for banks is brokers who deposit large sums of money on behalf of investors through trust corporations. this money will generally go to the banks which offer the most favourable terms  often better than those offered local depositors. it is possible for a bank to engage in business with no local deposits at all  all funds being brokered deposits. accepting a significant quantity of such deposits  or  hot money  as it is sometimes called  puts a bank in a difficult and sometimes risky position  as the funds must be lent or invested in a way that yields a return sufficient to pay the high interest being paid on the brokered deposits. this may result in risky decisions and even in eventual failure of the bank. banks which failed during 2008 and 2009 in the united states during the global financial crisis had  on average  four times more brokered deposits as a percent of their deposits than the average bank. such deposits  combined with risky real estate investments  factored into the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s. regulation of brokered deposits is opposed by banks on the grounds that the practice can be a source of external funding to growing communities with insufficient local deposits. there are different types of accounts  saving  recurring and current accounts.   === custodial accounts === custodial accounts are accounts in which assets are held for a third party. for example  businesses that accept custody of funds for clients prior to their conversion  return or transfer may have a custodial account at a bank for this purposes.   == globalization in the banking industry == in modern time there has been huge reductions to the barriers of global competition in the banking industry. increases in telecommunications and other financial technologies  such as bloomberg  have allowed banks to extend their reach all over the world  since they no longer have
to be near customers to manage both their finances and their risk. the growth in cross-border activities has also increased the demand for banks that can provide various services across borders to different nationalities. however  despite these reductions in barriers and growth in cross-border activities  the banking industry is nowhere near as globalized as some other industries. in the us  for instance  very few banks even worry about the riegle–neal act  which promotes more efficient interstate banking. in the vast majority of nations around the globe the market share for foreign owned banks is currently less than a tenth of all market shares for banks in a particular nation. one reason the banking industry has not been fully globalized is that it is more convenient to have local banks provide loans to small business and individuals. on the other hand  for large corporations  it is not as important in what nation the bank is in  since the corporation s financial information is available around the globe.   == see also ==   == references ==   == external links ==  guardian datablog – world s biggest banks banking  banks  and credit unions from ucb libraries govpubs a guide to the national banking system (pdf). office of the comptroller of the currency (occ)  washington  d.c. provides an overview of the national banking system of the us  its regulation  and the occ.
an actor is a person who portrays a character in a performance (also actress  see below). the actor performs  in the flesh  in the traditional medium of the theatre or in modern media such as film  radio  and television. the analogous greek term is ὑποκριτής (hupokritḗs)  literally  one who answers . the actor s interpretation of their role—the art of acting—pertains to the role played  whether based on a real person or fictional character. interpretation occurs even when the actor is  playing themselves  as in some forms of experimental performance art. formerly  in ancient greece and rome  the medieval world  and the time of william shakespeare  only men could become actors  and women s roles were generally played by men or boys.  after the english restoration of 1660  women began to appear on stage in england. in modern times  particularly in pantomime and some operas  women occasionally play the roles of boys or young men.   == the term actress == after 1660 in england  when women first started to appear on stage  the terms actor or actress were initially used interchangeably for female performers  but later  influenced by the french actrice  actress became the commonly used term for women in theater and film. the etymology is a simple derivation from actor with -ess added. when referring to groups of performers of both sexes  actors is preferred. actor is also used before the full name of a performer as a gender-specific term. within the profession  the re-adoption of the neutral term dates to the post-war period of the 1950 and  60s  when the contributions of women to cultural life in general were being reviewed. when the observer and the guardian published their new joint style guide in 2010  it stated  use [ actor ] for both male and female actors  do not use actress except when in name of award  e.g. oscar for best actress.  the guide s authors stated that  actress comes into the same category as authoress  comedienne  manageress   lady doctor   male nurse  and similar obsolete terms that date from a time when professions were largely the preserve of one sex (usually men).  (see male as norm).  as whoopi goldberg put it in an interview with the paper   an actress can only play a woman. i m an actor – i can play anything.  the uk performers  union equity has no policy on the use of  actor  or  actress . an equity spokesperson said that the union does not believe that there is a consensus on the matter and stated that the  ...subject divides the profession . in 2009  the los angeles times stated that  actress  remains the common term used in major acting awards given to female recipients (e.g.  academy award for best
actress). with regard to the cinema of the united states  the gender-neutral term  player  was common in film in the silent film era and the early days of the motion picture production code  but in the 2000s in a film context  it is generally deemed archaic. however   player  remains in use in the theatre  often incorporated into the name of a theatre group or company  such as the american players  the east west players  etc. also  actors in improvisational theatre may be referred to as  players .   === pay equity === in 2015  forbes reported that  ...just 21 of the 100 top-grossing films of 2014 featured a female lead or co-lead  while only 28.1% of characters in 100 top-grossing films were female... .  in the u.s.  there is an  industry-wide [gap] in salaries of all scales. on average  white women get paid 78 cents to every dollar a white man makes  while hispanic women earn 56 cents to a white male s dollar  black women 64 cents and native american women just 59 cents to that.  forbes  analysis of us acting salaries in 2013 determined that the  ...men on forbes  list of top-paid actors for that year made 21/2 times as much money as the top-paid actresses. that means that hollywood s best-compensated actresses made just 40 cents for every dollar that the best-compensated men made.    == history == the first recorded case of a performing actor occurred in 534 bc (though the changes in calendar over the years make it hard to determine exactly) when the greek performer thespis stepped onto the stage at the theatre dionysus to become the first known person to speak words as a character in a play or story. prior to thespis  act  grecian stories were only expressed in song  dance  and in third person narrative. in honor of thespis  actors are commonly called thespians. the exclusively male actors in the theatre of ancient greece performed in three types of drama  tragedy  comedy  and the satyr play. western theatre developed and expanded considerably under the romans. the theatre of ancient rome was a thriving and diverse art form  ranging from festival performances of street theatre  nude dancing  and acrobatics  to the staging of situation comedies  to high-style  verbally elaborate tragedies. as the western roman empire fell into decay through the 4th and 5th centuries  the seat of roman power shifted to constantinople and the byzantine empire. records show that mime  pantomime  scenes or recitations from tragedies and comedies  dances  and other entertainments were very popular. from the 5th century  western europe was plunged into a period of general disorder. small nomadic bands of actors traveled around europe throughout the period  performing wherever they could find an audience  there is no evidence that
they produced anything but crude scenes. traditionally  actors were not of high status  therefore  in the early middle ages  traveling acting troupes were often viewed with distrust. early middle ages actors were denounced by the church during the dark ages  as they were viewed as dangerous  immoral  and pagan. in many parts of europe  traditional beliefs of the region and time period meant actors could not receive a christian burial. in the early middle ages  churches in europe began staging dramatized versions of biblical events. by the middle of the 11th century  liturgical drama had spread from russia to scandinavia to italy. the feast of fools encouraged the development of comedy. in the late middle ages  plays were produced in 127 towns. these vernacular mystery plays often contained comedy  with actors playing devils  villains  and clowns. the majority of actors in these plays were drawn from the local population. amateur performers in england were exclusively male  but other countries had female performers. there were a number of secular plays staged in the middle ages  the earliest of which is the play of the greenwood by adam de la halle in 1276. it contains satirical scenes and folk material such as faeries and other supernatural occurrences. farces also rose dramatically in popularity after the 13th century. at the end of the late middle ages  professional actors began to appear in england and europe. richard iii and henry vii both maintained small companies of professional actors. beginning in the mid-16th century  commedia dell arte troupes performed lively improvisational playlets across europe for centuries. commedia dell arte was an actor-centred theatre  requiring little scenery and very few props. plays were loose frameworks that provided situations  complications  and outcome of the action  around which the actors improvised. the plays utilised stock characters. a troupe typically consisted of 13 to 14 members. most actors were paid a share of the play s profits roughly equivalent to the sizes of their roles.  renaissance theatre derived from several medieval theatre traditions  such as the mystery plays   morality plays  and the  university drama  that attempted to recreate athenian tragedy. the italian tradition of commedia dell arte  as well as the elaborate masques frequently presented at court  also contributed to the shaping of public theatre. since before the reign of elizabeth i  companies of players were attached to households of leading aristocrats and performed seasonally in various locations. these became the foundation for the professional players that performed on the elizabethan stage. the development of the theatre and opportunities for acting ceased when puritan opposition to the stage banned the performance of all plays within london. puritans viewed the theatre as immoral. the re-opening of the theatres in 1660 signaled a renaissance of english drama. english comedies written and performed in the restoration period from 1660 to 1710 are collectively called  restoration comedy . restoration comedy is notorious
for its sexual explicitness. at this point  women were allowed for the first time to appear on the english stage  exclusively in female roles. this period saw the introduction of the first professional actresses and the rise of the first celebrity actors.   === 19th century ===  in the 19th century  the negative reputation of actors was largely reversed  and acting became an honored  popular profession and art. the rise of the actor as celebrity provided the transition  as audiences flocked to their favorite  stars . a new role emerged for the actor-managers  who formed their own companies and controlled the actors  the productions  and the financing. when successful  they built up a permanent clientele that flocked to their productions. they could enlarge their audience by going on tour across the country  performing a repertoire of well-known plays  such as those by shakespeare. the newspapers  private clubs  pubs  and coffee shops rang with lively debates evaluating the relative merits of the stars and the productions. henry irving (1838-1905) was the most successful of the british actor-managers. irving was renowned for his shakespearean roles  and for such innovations as turning out the house lights so that attention could focus more on the stage and less on the audience. his company toured across britain  as well as europe and the united states  demonstrating the power of star actors and celebrated roles to attract enthusiastic audiences. his knighthood in 1895 indicated full acceptance into the higher circles of british society.   === 20th century ===  by the early 20th century  the economics of large-scale productions displaced the actor-manager model. it was too hard to find people who combined a genius at acting as well as management  so specialization divided the roles as stage managers and later theatre directors emerged. financially  much larger capital was required to operate out of a major city. the solution was corporate ownership of chains of theatres  such as by the theatrical syndicate  edward laurillard  and especially the shubert organization. by catering to tourists  theaters in large cities increasingly favored long runs of highly popular plays  especially musicals. big name stars became even more essential.   == techniques ==  classical acting is an umbrella term for a philosophy of acting that integrates the expression of the body  voice  imagination  personalizing  improvisation  external stimuli  and script analysis. it is based on the theories and systems of select classical actors and directors including konstantin stanislavski and michel saint-denis. in stanislavski s system  also known as stanislavski s method  actors draw upon their own feelings and experiences to convey the  truth  of the character they portray. actors puts themselves in the mindset of the character  finding things in common to give a more genuine portrayal of the character. method acting is a range of techniques based on for training actors
to achieve better characterizations of the characters they play  as formulated by lee strasberg. strasberg s method is based upon the idea that to develop an emotional and cognitive understanding of their roles  actors should use their own experiences to identify personally with their characters. it is based on aspects of stanislavski s system. other acting techniques are also based on stanislavski s ideas  such as those of stella adler and sanford meisner  but these are not considered  method acting . meisner technique requires the actor to focus totally on the other actor as though he or she is real and they only exist in that moment. this is a method that makes the actors in the scene seem more authentic to the audience. it is based on the principle that acting finds its expression in people s response to other people and circumstances. is it based on stanislavski s system.   == as opposite sex == formerly  in some societies  only men could become actors. in ancient greece and ancient rome and the medieval world  it was considered disgraceful for a woman to go on stage  this belief persisted until the 17th century in venice. in the time of william shakespeare  women s roles were generally played by men or boys.when an eighteen-year puritan prohibition of drama was lifted after the english restoration of 1660  women began to appear on stage in england. margaret hughes is oft credited as the first professional actress on the english stage. this prohibition ended during the reign of charles ii in part because he enjoyed watching actresses on stage. specifically  charles ii issued letters patent to thomas killigrew and william davenant  granting them the monopoly right to form two london theatre companies to perform  serious  drama  and the letters patent were reissued in 1662 with revisions allowing actresses to perform for the first time.the first occurrence of the term actress was in 1608 according to the oed and is ascribed to middleton. in the 19th century many viewed women in acting negatively  as actresses were often courtesans and associated with promiscuity. despite these prejudices  the 19th century also saw the first female acting  stars  most notably sarah bernhardt.in japan  onnagata  men taking on female roles  were used in kabuki theatre when women were banned from performing on stage during the edo period. this convention continues. by contrast  some forms of chinese drama involve women playing all roles. in modern times  women occasionally played the roles of boys or young men. for example  the stage role of peter pan is traditionally played by a woman  as are most principal boys in british pantomime. opera has several  breeches roles  traditionally sung by women  usually mezzo-sopranos. examples are hansel in hänsel und gretel  cherubino in the marriage of figaro and octavian in der rosenkavalier. women playing male roles are uncommon in film  with notable exceptions.
in 1982  stina ekblad played the mysterious ismael retzinsky in fanny and alexander  and linda hunt received the academy award for best supporting actress for playing billy kwan in the year of living dangerously. in 2007  cate blanchett was nominated for the academy award for best supporting actress for playing jude quinn  a fictionalized representation of bob dylan in the 1960s  in i m not there. in the 2000s  women playing men in live theatre is particularly common in presentations of older plays  such as shakespearean works with large numbers of male characters in roles where gender is inconsequential.having an actor dress as the opposite sex for comic effect is also a long-standing tradition in comic theatre and film. most of shakespeare s comedies include instances of overt cross-dressing  such as francis flute in a midsummer night s dream. the movie a funny thing happened on the way to the forum stars jack gilford dressing as a young bride. tony curtis and jack lemmon famously posed as women to escape gangsters in the billy wilder film some like it hot. cross-dressing for comic effect was a frequently used device in most of the carry on films. dustin hoffman and robin williams have each appeared in a hit comedy film (tootsie and mrs. doubtfire  respectively) in which they played most scenes dressed as a woman. occasionally  the issue is further complicated  for example  by a woman playing a woman acting as a man—who then pretends to be a woman  such as julie andrews in victor/victoria  or gwyneth paltrow in shakespeare in love. in it s pat  the movie  filmwatchers never learn the gender of the androgynous main characters pat and chris (played by julia sweeney and dave foley). similarly  in the aforementioned example of the marriage of figaro  there is a scene in which cherubino (a male character portrayed by a woman) dresses up and acts as a woman  the other characters in the scene are aware of a single level of gender role obfuscation  while the audience is aware of two levels. a few modern roles are played by a member of the opposite sex in order to emphasize the gender fluidity of the role. edna turnblad in hairspray was played by divine in the 1988 original film  harvey fierstein in the broadway musical  and john travolta in the 2007 movie musical. felicity huffman was nominated for an academy award for best actress for playing bree osbourne (a male-to-female transsexual) in 2005 s transamerica.   == types == actors working in theatre  film  television and radio have to learn specific skills. techniques that work well in one type of acting may not work well in another type of acting.   === in theatre === to act on stage  actors need to learn the stage directions that appear in the script  such as  stage left  and  stage right . these directions are
based on the actor s point of view as he or she stands on the stage facing the audience. actors also have to learn the meaning of the stage directions  upstage  (away from the audience) and  downstage  (towards the audience) theatre actors need to learn blocking  which is  ...where and how an actor moves on the stage during a play . most scripts specify some blocking. the director also gives instructions on blocking  such as crossing the stage or picking up and using a prop.some theater actors need to learn stage combat  which is simulated fighting on stage. actors may have to simulate hand-to-hand [fighting] or sword[-fighting]. actors are coached by fight directors  who help them learn the choreographed sequence of fight actions.   === in film ===   ==== silent films ==== from 1894 to the late 1920s  movies were silent films. silent film actors emphasized body language and facial expression  so that the audience could better understand what an actor was feeling and portraying on screen. much silent film acting is apt to strike modern-day audiences as simplistic or campy. the melodramatic acting style was in some cases a habit actors transferred from their former stage experience. vaudeville theatre was an especially popular origin for many american silent film actors. the pervading presence of stage actors in film was the cause of this outburst from director marshall neilan in 1917   the sooner the stage people who have come into pictures get out  the better for the pictures.  in other cases  directors such as john griffith wray required their actors to deliver larger-than-life expressions for emphasis. as early as 1914  american viewers had begun to make known their preference for greater naturalness on screen.pioneering film directors in europe and the united states recognized the different limitations and freedoms of the mediums of stage and screen by the early 1910s. silent films became less vaudevillian in the mid 1910s  as the differences between stage and screen became apparent. due to the work of directors such as d w griffith  cinematography became less stage-like  and the then-revolutionary close up shot allowed subtle and naturalistic acting. in america  d.w. griffith s company biograph studios  became known for its innovative direction and acting  conducted suit the cinema rather than the stage. griffith realized that theatrical acting did not look good on film and required his actors and actresses to go through weeks of film acting training.lillian gish has been called film s  first true actress  for her work in the period  as she pioneered new film performing techniques  recognizing the crucial differences between stage and screen acting. directors such as albert capellani and maurice tourneur began to insist on naturalism in their films. by the mid-1920s many american silent films had adopted a more naturalistic acting style  though not all actors and directors accepted naturalistic  low-key acting straight away  as late as 1927
 films featuring expressionistic acting styles  such as metropolis  were still being released. according to anton kaes  a silent film scholar from the university of wisconsin  american silent cinema began to see a shift in acting techniques between 1913 and 1921  influenced by techniques found in german silent film. this is mainly attributed to the influx of emigrants from the weimar republic   including film directors  producers  cameramen  lighting and stage technicians  as well as actors and actresses .   ==== advent of sound in film ==== film actors have to learn to get used to and be comfortable with a camera being in front of them. film actors need to learn to find and stay on their  mark.  this is a position on the floor marked with tape. this position is where the lights and camera focus are optimized. film actors also need to learn how to prepare well and perform well on screen tests. screen tests are a filmed audition of part of the script. unlike theater actors  who develop characters for repeat performances  film actors lack continuity  forcing them to come to all scenes (sometimes shot in reverse of the order in which they ultimately appear) with a fully developed character already. since film captures even the smallest gesture and magnifies it...  cinema demands a less flamboyant and stylized bodily performance from the actor than does the theater.   the performance of emotion is the most difficult aspect of film acting to master  ...the film actor must rely on subtle facial ticks  quivers  and tiny lifts of the eyebrow to create a believable character.  some theatre stars  ...have made the theater-to-cinema transition quite successfully (laurence olivier  glenn close  and julie andrews  for instance)  others have not...    === in television ===  on a television set  there are typically several cameras angled at the set. actors who are new to on-screen acting can get confused about which camera to look into.  tv actors need to learn to use lav mics (lavaliere microphones). tv actors need to understand the concept of  frame .  the term frame refers to the area that the camera s lens is capturing.  within the acting industry  there are four types of television roles one could land on a show. each type varies in prominence  frequency of appearance  and pay. the first is known as a series regular—the main actors on the show as part of the permanent cast. actors in recurring roles are under contract to appear in multiple episodes of a series. a co-star role is a small speaking role that usually only appears in one episode. a guest star is a larger role than a co-star role  and the character is often the central focus of the episode or integral to the plot.   === in radio ===  radio drama is a dramatized
 purely acoustic performance  broadcast on radio or published on audio media  such as tape or cd. with no visual component  radio drama depends on dialogue  music and sound effects to help the listener imagine the characters and story   it is auditory in the physical dimension but equally powerful as a visual force in the psychological dimension. radio drama achieved widespread popularity within a decade of its initial development in the 1920s. by the 1940s  it was a leading international popular entertainment. with the advent of television in the 1950s  however  radio drama lost some of its popularity  and in some countries has never regained large audiences. however  recordings of otr (old-time radio) survive today in the audio archives of collectors and museums  as well as several online sites such as internet archive. as of 2011  radio drama has a minimal presence on terrestrial radio in the united states. much of american radio drama is restricted to rebroadcasts or podcasts of programs from previous decades. however  other nations still have thriving traditions of radio drama. in the united kingdom  for example  the bbc produces and broadcasts hundreds of new radio plays each year on radio 3  radio 4  and radio 4 extra. podcasting has also offered the means of creating new radio dramas  in addition to the distribution of vintage programs. the terms  audio drama  or  audio theatre  are sometimes used synonymously with  radio drama  with one possible distinction  audio drama or audio theatre may not necessarily be intended specifically for broadcast on radio. audio drama  whether newly produced or otr classics  can be found on cds  cassette tapes  podcasts  webcasts and conventional broadcast radio. thanks to advances in digital recording and internet distribution  radio drama is experiencing a revival.   == see also ==   == references ==   === sources === csapo  eric  and william j. slater. 1994. the context of ancient drama. ann arbor  the u of michigan p. isbn 0-472-08275-2. elam  keir. 1980. the semiotics of theatre and drama. new accents ser. london and new york  methuen. isbn 0-416-72060-9. weimann  robert. 1978. shakespeare and the popular tradition in the theater  studies in the social dimension of dramatic form and function. ed. robert schwartz. baltimore and london  the johns hopkins university press. isbn 0-8018-3506-2.   == further reading == an actor s work by constantin stanislavski a dream of passion  the development of the method by lee strasberg (plume books  isbn 0-452-26198-8  1990) sanford meisner on acting by sanford meisner (vintage  isbn 0-394-75059-4  1987) letters to a young actor by robert brustein (basic books  isbn 0-465-00806-2  2005). the empty space by peter brook the technique of acting by stella adler   == external links == screen actors guild (sag)  a union representing u. s. film and
tv actors. actors  equity association (aea)  a union representing u. s. theatre actors and stage managers. american federation of television and radio artists (aftra)  a union representing u. s. television and radio actors and broadcasters (on-air journalists  etc.). british actors  equity  a trade union representing uk artists  including actors  singers  dancers  choreographers  stage managers  theatre directors and designers  variety and circus artists  television and radio presenters  walk-on and supporting artists  stunt performers and directors and theatre fight directors. media entertainment & arts alliance  an australian/new zealand trade union representing everyone in the media  entertainment  sports  and arts industries.
thespia may refer to    alternative spelling of thespiae  an ancientcity and former bishopric in boeotia (greece)  also as latin catholic titular see thespia (mythology) a synonym for colotis  a genus of thespia  former name of uss hist (1895)  a us navy ship which saw combat in the spanish–american war
a police officer  also known as an officer  policeman  or a policewoman is a warranted law employee of a police force. in most countries   police officer  is a generic term not specifying a particular rank. in some  the use of the rank  officer  is legally reserved for military personnel. police officers are generally charged with the apprehension of criminals and the prevention and detection of crime  protection and assistance of the general public  and the maintenance of public order. police officers may be sworn to an oath  and have the power to arrest people and detain them for a limited time  along with other duties and powers. some officers are trained in special duties  such as counter-terrorism  surveillance  child protection  vip protection  civil law enforcement  and investigation techniques into major crime including fraud  rape  murder  and drug trafficking. although many police officers wear a corresponding uniform  some police officers are plain-clothed in order to pass themselves off as civilians. in most countries police officers are given exemptions from certain laws to perform their duties. for example an officer may use force if necessary to arrest or detain a person when it would ordinarily be assault. officers can also break road rules to perform their duties.   == etymology == the word  police  comes from the greek politeia  meaning government  which came to mean its civil administration. the more general term for the function is law enforcement officer or peace officer. a sheriff is typically the top police officer of a county  with that word coming from the person enforcing law over a shire. a person who has been deputized to serve the function of the sheriff is referred to as the deputy. police officers are those empowered by government to enforce the laws it creates. in the federalist collection of articles and essays  james madison wrote   if men were angels  no government would be necessary . these words apply to those who serve government  including police. a common nickname for a police officer is  cop  derived from the verb sense  to arrest  itself derived from  to grab . thus   someone who captures  a  copper  was shortened to just  cop . it may also find its origin in the latin capere  brought to english via the old french caper.   == duties and functions ==  responsibilities of a police officer are varied  and may differ greatly from within one political context to another. typical duties relate to keeping the peace  law enforcement  protection of people and property and the investigation of crimes. officers are expected to respond to a variety of situations that may arise while they are on duty. rules and guidelines dictate how an officer should behave within the community  and in many contexts  restrictions are placed on
what the uniformed officer wears. in some countries  rules and procedures dictate that a police officer is obliged to intervene in a criminal incident  even if they are off-duty. police officers in nearly all countries retain their lawful powers while off duty.in the majority of western legal systems  the major role of the police is to maintain order  keeping the peace through surveillance of the public  and the subsequent reporting and apprehension of suspected violators of the law. they also function to discourage crimes through high-visibility policing  and most police forces have an investigative capability. police have the legal authority to arrest and detain  usually granted by magistrates. police officers also respond to emergency calls  along with routine community policing. police are often used as an emergency service and may provide a public safety function at large gatherings  as well as in emergencies  disasters  search and rescue situations  and road traffic collisions. to provide a prompt response in emergencies  the police often coordinate their operations with fire and emergency medical services. in some countries  individuals serve jointly as police officers as well as firefighters (creating the role of fire police). in many countries  there is a common emergency service number that allows the police  firefighters  or medical services to be summoned to an emergency. some countries  such as the united kingdom have outlined command procedures  for the use in major emergencies or disorder. the gold silver bronze command structure is a system set up to improve communications between ground-based officers and the control room  typically  bronze commander would be a senior officer on the ground  coordinating the efforts in the center of the emergency  silver commanders would be positioned in an  incident control room  erected to improve better communications at the scene  and a gold commander who would be in the control room. police are also responsible for reprimanding minor offenders by issuing citations which typically may result in the imposition of fines  particularly for violations of traffic law. traffic enforcement is often and effectively accomplished by police officers on motorcycles—called motor officers  these officers refer to the motorcycles they ride on duty as simply motors. police are also trained to assist persons in distress  such as motorists whose car has broken down and people experiencing a medical emergency. police are typically trained in basic first aid such as cpr. some park rangers are commissioned as law enforcement officers and carry out a law-enforcement role within national parks and other back-country wilderness and recreational areas  whereas military police perform law enforcement functions within the military.   == entry and promotion qualifications == in most countries  candidates for the police force must have completed some formal education. increasing numbers of people are joining the police force who possess tertiary education  and in response to this many police forces have developed a  fast-track  scheme whereby those with university degrees
spend two to three years as a constable before receiving promotion to higher ranks  such as sergeants or inspectors. (officers who work within investigative divisions or plainclothes are not necessarily of a higher rank but merely have different duties.) police officers are also recruited from those with experience in the military or security services. in the united states state laws may codify statewide qualification standards regarding age  education  criminal record  and training but in other places requirements are set by local police agencies. each local police agency has different requirements.  promotion is not automatic and usually requires the candidate to pass some kind of examination  interview board or other selection procedure. although promotion normally includes an increase in salary  it also brings with it an increase in responsibility and for most  an increase in administrative paperwork. there is no stigma attached to this  as experienced line patrol officers are highly regarded. dependent upon each agency  but generally after completing two years of service  officers may apply for specialist positions  such as detective  police dog handler  mounted police officer  motorcycle officer  water police officer  or firearms officer (in countries where police are not routinely armed). in some countries  including singapore  police ranks are supplemented through conscription  similar to national service in the military. qualifications may thus be relaxed or enhanced depending on the target mix of conscripts. conscripts face tougher physical requirements in areas such as eyesight  but minimum academic qualification requirements are less stringent. some join as volunteers  again via differing qualification requirements.   == pay == in some societies  police officers are paid relatively well compared to other occupations  their pay depends on what rank they are within their police force and how many years they have served. in the united states  a police officer s salary averaged $61 230 in 2015.  in the united kingdom for the year 2015–16 a police officer s average salary was £30 901.   == occupational safety and health == there are numerous issues affecting the safety and health of police officers  including line of duty deaths and occupational stress. on august 6  2019  new jersey attorney general gurbir grewal announced creation of the first u.s. statewide program to support the mental health of police officers. the goal of the program would be to train officers in emotional resiliency and to help destigmatize mental health issues.   == application of force ==   === individual cases ===  almost universally  police officers are authorized the use of force  up to and including deadly force  when acting in a law enforcement capacity. although most law enforcement agencies follow some variant of the use of force continuum  where officers are only authorized the level of force required to match situational requirements  specific thresholds and responses vary between jurisdictions. while officers are trained to avoid excessive use of force 
and may be held legally accountable for infractions  the variability of law enforcement and its dependence on human judgment have made the subject an area of controversy and research.   === accountability ===  in the performance of their duties  police officers may act unlawfully  either deliberately or as a result of errors in judgment. police accountability efforts strive to protect citizens and their rights by ensuring legal and effective law enforcement conduct  while affording individual officers the required autonomy  protection  and discretion. as an example  the use of body-worn cameras has been shown to reduce both instances of misconduct and complaints against officers.   == see also ==   == references ==   == external links == discoveringpolicing.org metropolitan police history 19th century picture of a us police officer with 6 pointed badge star
a constable is a person holding a particular office  most commonly in criminal law enforcement. the office of constable can vary significantly in different jurisdictions. a constable is commonly the rank of an officer within the police. other people may be granted powers of a constable without holding this title.    == etymology ==  historically  the title comes from the latin comes stabuli (attendant to the stables  literally count of the stable) and originated from the roman empire  originally  the constable was the officer responsible for keeping the horses of a lord or monarch.the title was imported to the monarchies of medieval europe  and in many countries developed into a high military rank and great officer of state (e.g. the constable of france  in french connétable de france  who was the commander-in-chief of all royal armed forces (second to the king) until prime minister cardinal richelieu abolished the charge in 1627). most constables in modern jurisdictions are law enforcement officers  in the united kingdom  the commonwealth of nations and some continental european countries  a constable is the lowest rank of police officer (it is also  when preceded by the term  sworn  used to describe any police officer with arrest and other powers)  while in the united states a constable is generally an elected peace officer with lesser jurisdiction than a sheriff. however  in the channel islands a constable is an elected office-holder at the parish level. historically  a constable could also refer to a castellan  the officer charged with the defense of a castle. even today  there is a constable of the tower of london. an equivalent position is that of marshal  which derives from old high german marah  horse  and schalh  servant  and originally meant  stable keeper  which has a similar etymology.    == modern usage by country and region ==   === australia ===  in australia  as in the united kingdom  constable is the lowest rank in most police services. it is often categorised into the following from lowest to highest  probationary constable  constable  constable first class  senior constable  leading senior constable. these variations depend on the individual state/territory police force in question. senior constable generally refers to a police officer of the rank above constable and is denoted by way of two chevrons/stripes. the new south wales police force has three grades of senior constable  namely senior constable (two chevrons)  incremental senior constable (two chevrons and a horizontal bar) and leading senior constable (two chevrons and two horizontal bars). a senior constable is senior to a constable but junior to an incremental senior constable. promotion to senior constable can occur after a minimum of five years service  one year as a probationary constable in addition to four years as constable and then upon passing probity checks and an exam. incremental senior constable is attained after ten
years of service automatically. one is appointed the rank of leading senior constable on a qualification basis but must have a minimum of seven years service amongst other criteria in order to be eligible. leading senior constable is a specialist position of which there are limited allocated numbers within any section/unit or local area command. if an officer is transferred to another duty type or station  the officer is then relieved of the position of leading senior constable. it is primarily a position for field training officers who oversee the training and development of inexperienced probationary constables or constables. within victoria police  a senior constable is the rank above a constable while above a senior constable is a leading senior constable. when first introduced into victoria police  the leading senior constable was a classification not a rank  somewhat like  detective . leading senior constables were appointed specifically to assist in the training and mentoring of more junior members. the last round of wage negotiations however saw leading senior constable become a rank in its own right  one that a lot of members will pass on their way from constable to sergeant though it is not strictly necessary and is permissible to be promoted to sergeant direct from senior constable. the general form of address for both senior constable and leading senior constable is  senior  and this is acceptable even in courts.   === canada ===  in canada  as in the united kingdom  constable is the lowest rank with most law enforcement services  including the royal canadian mounted police. in newfoundland the provincial police are the royal newfoundland constabulary whereby all officers are addressed by the term  constable . in addition  the chief officers of some municipal police services in canada  notably vancouver police department  carry the title of chief constablein canadian french  constable is translated to agent  except in the royal canadian mounted police where it is translated as gendarme.) appointments can further be separated into   special constables rcmp special constables are appointed for specific skills  for example  aboriginal language skills. they are peace officers under the royal canadian mounted police act. outside of the rcmp  special constables are not police officers but are appointed to serve certain law enforcement functions. for example  spca agents or court/jail officers. auxiliary constables  or reserve constables  are volunteers with a policing agency. they generally only have peace officer status when engaged in specific authorized tasks only. provincial civil constables (in nova scotia) deal with matters of a civil nature.   === denmark === in the danish armed forces the ranks  konstabel   overkonstabel  and  overkonstabel af 1. grad  are used for professional enlisted soldiers  sailors and airmen. the rank is more or less equal to a private (rank)  private 1st class (rank) and lance corporal (rank) but higher than the rank  menig  which literally translates into  private
 and only applies to drafted soldiers.   === finland === in the finnish police  the lowest rank of police officer is called nuorempi konstaapeli  translated into english as (junior) constable. the next rank is vanhempi konstaapeli or senior constable. the next highest rank (equivalent to a police sergeant in the english-speaking world) is ylikonstaapeli (yli-  leading )  literally  over-constable .   === hong kong === the hong kong police force have two ranks for constables   senior constable—lead officer in a beat patrol  spcs wear a single chevron on their shoulder above their unique identification (ui) number. constable—officer in a beat patrol  pcs wear no insignia other than the unique identification (ui) number.senior constable is not a rank – it is merely a designation for officers who have served for 18 years.   === india === police constable (abbreviated pc) is the lowest police rank in india  followed by head constable. general law and order being a state subject in india  each state government recruits police constables. a police constable has no shoulder insignia  while a head constable has one strip or one chevron  depending upon the state. all senior officers are indian police service officers appointed through civil services exam. since each state has its own police force  the uniforms and insignia of the police vary  though the rank structure is the same. the central paramilitary forces under the ministry of internal affairs also maintain the same ranks as state police even though their jurisdiction varies considerably. nearly all the police constables wear khaki-coloured uniforms which indicate that he/she is a police officer.   === norway === in the norwegian police service the rank  politikonstabel  was until 2003 the lowest rank in the police  the next ranks being  politioverkonstabel   politibetjent   politiførstebetjent   politioverbetjent  and  politistasjonssjef   lensmann  or  sysselmannsoverbetjent  (all officially translated as chief superintendent). in 2003  the ranks  politikonstabel   politioverkonstabel  and  politibetjent  were renamed  politibetjent 1   politibetjent 2  and  politibetjent 3  where  politibetjent 1  is the entry-level rank for a policeman and most junior rank of the police service. all ranks higher than chief superintendent are commissioned ranks  known simply as  higher ranks  and traditionally required a law degree. the norwegian police service has an integrated prosecution service in which the police lawyers  who all hold higher ranks  require the law degree  candidatus/candidata juris  or  master of laws  (master i rettsvitenskap)  awarded after 5 or 6 years of law studies. following reforms of the police  a law degree is no longer required by law for all higher ranks  although only lawyers can act as prosecutors and supervise criminal investigations  for which reason it is still common for those holding higher ranks to be lawyers. the entry-level rank for
a lawyer  junior police prosecutor  outranks the most senior rank for a policeman  chief superintendent  as the former is the most junior of the  higher ranks  whereas the latter is the most senior of the  lower ranks.  the fire brigades (all municipal) still use  konstabel  as in  brannkonstabel  (fire-constable).   === pakistan === in pakistan  constable and head constable are  respectively  the lowest and second lowest ranks in police force.   === singapore === in singapore  a police constable (abbreviated to pc) is the lowest rank in the singapore police force. the rank of special constable exists  but is centralised under the volunteer special constabulary in singapore.   === sri lanka === in sri lanka  the sri lanka police has the rank of  police constable  with four classes.   === united kingdom ===  in the modern times  there are two main definitions of a constable in the united kingdom   the lowest rank of a police force. a legal term for an officer with the powers of a police officer.the latter usage is mainly used in formal contexts  including legislation such as the police and criminal evidence act 1984. by this definition  all police officers are constables  even those that do not hold the actual rank of constable. thus the head of most police forces is a chief constable  volunteer officers of any rank are known as special constables and some police forces have the word  constabulary  in their name. there are also some constables who are not police officers  such as cathedral constables and cambridge university constables. within the police itself  there are three eponymous offices bearing the legal power of constable  police constable  detective constable and special constable. the former two of these are paid  mostly full-time positions  while those holding the role of special constable volunteer their time unpaid and do so around their normal working commitments. the ranks of police constable and detective constable are often abbreviated in everyday use to pc and dc respectively. from 1919 when they were first recruited in the uk  female police officers were distinguished from their male counterparts by the prefix  woman  before their rank (wpc or wdc). this was officially discontinued in 1999  although is still sometimes used informally by members of the public.   ==== constable ==== constable is the first rank  one rank below a sergeant and five ranks below chief superintendent in all police forces in the united kingdom. within the british police all police officers are sworn in as and hold the basic powers of a constable. upon being sworn in  each officer starts at the rank of constable and is required to undergo a two-year probationary period. upon successful completion  constables can remain at their current rank  specialise in criminal investigations or one of many other specialist units
 or apply for promotion to sergeant  the first supervisory rank. constables wear an epaulette attached to the uniform  displaying their collar number (also called a shoulder number). within greater london s metropolitan police  all constables and sergeants display a divisional call sign  as well as an individual number. a new probationary constable within a county police force is paid an annual salary of £19 971  with this rising to £23 124 after training  reaching a ceiling level of £38 382. constables within the metropolitan police service are paid an additional london weighting allowance which is currently set at £2 277.the first female constables were employed by railway constabularies during world war i with for example the north east railway police swearing in four in late 1917 the term woman police constable was used across british forces.   ==== detective constable ==== the rank of detective constable (dc) is a special type but not senior to that of a uniformed constable  the  detective  prefix identifies the officer as being part of cid or other investigative unit.   ==== special constable ==== from 1673 to 1831  a special constable was a citizen who was appointed to act as constable on special occasions  such as to quell a riot. in 1831 this evolved to a permanent volunteer police force. special constables generally had powers within a designated area. however  legislation changed to give them identical powers as constables that are no longer regional but are enforceable across england and wales.   ==== war reserve constable ==== during world war ii  there was an additional volunteer war reserve police introduced in 1939  consisting at its height in 1944 of 17 000 war reserve constables (or wrc  war reserve police constable  wrpc). the rank of wrc/wrpc was dissolved on 31 december 1948  and most of these were then recruited for service as regular or special constables.   ==== head constable ==== head constable is a title for a police sergeant in some commonwealth police forces. it was also previously a senior rank in the royal irish constabulary  with authority lying somewhere between the ranks of inspector and superintendent in later british and irish police forces.   ==== legislation ==== legislation existed to appoint constables  but often did not direct how such bodies should operate and what organisational form they should take. the police act 1964 standardised arrangements through establishing wider geographical police forces  which merged many constabularies. the police act 1964 gave direction on the organisational form of police forces  the appointment of officers and disciplinary matters  in the broadest sense it provided a statutory governance framework. the act established the  tripartite  model of policing  which formed police authorities. this established a three-way balance of power between the authority s chairman  the chief constable and the home secretary. this arrangement varied within london for the metropolitan police and the city of london police. the police
act 1964 was superseded by the police act 1996  which contained similar provisions. further legislation was introduced for the british transport police and the civil nuclear constabulary that was similar in defining their organisational form and embedding governance arrangements. legislation still exists to appoint constables that are not technically part of a police force. for example  local authorities can appoint constables to enforce parks by-laws and such officers are employed by the local authority. legislation provides for the appointment of constables to police ports  tunnels  oxford and cambridge universities  epping forest  anglican cathedrals (cathedral constables)  and markets. such bodies are often referred to as  private constabularies .   ==== similarly empowered law enforcement officers ==== legislation exists that allows for three main categories of state officer to have the powers of constable  without being sworn in as such.  water bailiffs  who check fishing permits and enforce some wildlife law. other staff charged with enforcing environmental crime such as pollution of water  illegal waste disposal or damage to natural plants or animals. such staff are typically employed by the environment agency  natural resources wales or scottish environmental protection agency. every prison officer while acting as such shall have all the powers  authority  protection and privileges of a constable. national crime agency (formerly soca) can also designate their officers with the power of a constable (as well as the specific powers of an immigration officer or customs. being given the power of a constable gives such individuals lawful excuse to carry offensive weapons and firearms while on duty).   ==== channel islands ====  in jersey and guernsey  the elected heads of the parishes (paroisse(s) in french) are titled  constables  (connétable(s) in french). the constables are entitled each to carry a silver-tipped baton of office. in jersey  each parish elects a constable for a three-year mandate to run the parish and also represent the parish in the legislature  the states of jersey. the constable presides over the roads committee  the conseil paroissial (parish council  the only exception being st. helier) and parish assemblies. the twelve constables also collectively sit as the comité des connétables (committee of constables). the constable is the titular head of the honorary police. with the roads inspectors  roads committee and other officers  the constable of each parish also carries out the visites du branchage twice a year. in guernsey  each parish elects two constables  the senior constable and the junior constable. persons elected generally serve a year as junior and then senior constable. the senior constable presides over the douzaine (dozen) that runs the parish. the constables are responsible for enforcing the brancage (summer hedge-cutting) and also have the power to declare any parishioner insane.   === united states ===  in the united states  there is no consistent use of the office of constable throughout the states  and use may even vary within a state. a constable may
be an official responsible for service of process  such as summonses and subpoenas for people to appear in court in criminal and/or civil matters. on the other hand  they can be fully empowered law enforcement officers. constables may also have additional specialized duties unique to the office. in some states  a constable may be appointed by the governor or a judge or magistrate of the court which he or she serves  in others the constable is an elected or appointed position at the state or local level of local government. their jurisdiction can vary from statewide to county/parish and local township boundaries based on the state s laws. the office developed from its british counterpart during the colonial period. prior to the modernization of law enforcement which took place in the middle 19th century  local law enforcement was performed by constables and watchmen. constables were appointed or elected at the local level for specific terms and  like their uk counterparts the parish constable  were not paid and did not wear a uniform. however  they were often paid a fee by the courts for each writ served and warrant executed. following the example of the british metropolitan police established in 1829  the states gradually enacted laws to permit municipalities to establish police departments. this differed from the uk in that the old system was not uniformly abolished in every state. often the enacting legislation of the state conferred a police officer with the powers of a constable  the most important of these powers being the common law power of arrest. police and constables exist concurrently in many jurisdictions. perhaps because of this  the title  constable  is not used for police of any rank. the lowest rank in a police organization would be officer  deputy  patrolman  trooper  and historically  private  depending on the particular organization. in many states  constables do not conduct patrols or preventive policing activities. in such states the office is relatively obscure to its citizens. a constable may be assisted by deputy constables as sworn officers or constable s officers as civil staff  usually as process servers. in some states  villages or towns  an office with similar duties is marshal.   == historical usage ==   === medieval armenia and georgia === the titles of sparapet and spaspet  derived from the ancient iranian spahbod  were used to designate the supreme commander of the armed forces in the medieval kingdoms of armenia and georgia  respectively.   === byzantine empire === the position of constable originated from the roman empire  by the 5th century ad the count of the stable (latin  comes stabuli) was responsible for the keeping of horses at the imperial court. the west european term  constable  itself was adopted  via the normans  as konostaulos in the komnenian and palaiologan periods  when it became a high military office of dignity.late roman administrative titles were used
by charlemagne in developing his empire  the position of constable  along with the similar office of marshal  spread throughout the emerging states of western europe during this period. in most medieval nations  the constable was the highest-ranking officer of the army  and was responsible for the overseeing of martial law.   === china === village-level chinese officials – known as tingzhang during the qin and han dynasties  lizheng  during the sui and tang  baozheng during the song  and dibao and shoubao during the qing – are sometimes translated constable for their functions of reporting crimes and administering local justice  although they also served as tax agents and notaries.   === france ===  the constable of france (connétable de france)  under the french monarchy  was the first officer of the crown of france and was originally responsible for commanding the army. his symbol of office was a longsword held by a hand issuing out of a cloud  a reference to the constable s duty of carrying the king s sword during a coronation ceremony. some constables were prominent military commanders in the medieval period  such as bertrand du guesclin who served from 1370 to 1380.   === united kingdom ===  the office of the constable was introduced in england following the norman conquest of 1066 and was responsible for the keeping and maintenance of the king s armaments and those of the villages as a measure of protecting individual settlements throughout the country. some authorities place the origins of constables in england earlier  attributing the creation of the office during the reign of king alfred (871  a.d.).the office of lord high constable  one of the great officers of state  was established in the kingdoms of england and scotland during the reigns of king stephen (1135–1154) and king david (1124–1154) respectively  and was responsible for the command of the army. the term was also used at the local level within the feudal system however  describing an officer appointed to keep order. one of the first descriptions of one of the legal duties of a constable  that of the collation of evidence  comes from bracton  a jurist writing between 1220 and 1250  in whatever way they come and on whatever day  it is the duty of the constable to enroll everything in order  for he has record as to the things he sees  but he cannot judge  because there is no judgment at the tower  since there the third element of a judicial proceeding is lacking  namely a judge and jurisdiction. he has record as to matters of fact  not matters of judgment and law. in bracton s time  anyone seeing a  misdeed  was empowered to make an arrest. the role of the constable in bracton s description was as the  eyes and ears  of the court  finding evidence and recording facts on
which judges could make a ruling. by extension  the constable was also the  strong arm  of the court (i.e.  of the common law)  marking the basic role of the constable that continues into the present day.in 1285  king edward i of england passed the statute of winchester  with provisions which  constituted two constables in every hundred to prevent defaults in towns and [on] highways . records of their narrower area successors  parish constables  appear in the early 17th century in the records of buckinghamshire  traditionally they were elected by the parishioners  but from 1617 onwards were typically appointed by justices of the peace (magistrates) in each county.the system of policing by unpaid parish constables continued in england until the 19th century  in the london metropolitan area it was ended by the creation of the metropolitan police by the metropolitan police act 1829  and by the county police constabularies outside london by the county police act 1839. together these led to all counties having various constabularies of full-time professionals. the lowest rank of the police forces and constabularies is  constable  and most outside london are headed by a chief constable.the unique office of  parks constable  was first created when liverpool corporation act 1921 (section 221) allowed for their appointment  although a body of constables had previously policed the parks whom were attested as special constables. specific legislation for the royal parks of london continued the unique office of  parks constable . however  the royal parks constabulary was disbanded in 2001. the kew constabulary are sworn in under the same legislation and remain as the holders of the office of parks constable. whilst some local authorities have parks constabularies  their officers are attested as constables  not parks constables.   === other european nations === the position of hereditary constable persists in some current or former monarchies of europe. the position of lord high constable of scotland is hereditary in the family of the earl of erroll. there is also a hereditary constable of navarre in spain  this position is presently held by the duchess of alba.historically  many other hereditary constables existed as officers of state in former monarchies. examples are the constable of castile (condestable de castilla) and the constable of portugal (condestável do reino).   == see also == marshal policing in the united kingdom policing in the united states sheriff individuals with powers of arrest   == notes ==   == references ==   == external links == patrick colquhoun  a treatise on the functions and duties of a constable. london  w. bulmer and co.  1803. françois hotman   of the constable and peers of france   franco-gallia  or  an account of the ancient free state of france  and most other parts of europe  before the loss of their liberties.[1574]  2nd ed. 1721 english translation from the original latin. project gutenberg e-text
# 17894. provincial civil constables in canada  cmpsns.com
a gendarmerie or gendarmery () is a military component with jurisdiction in civil law enforcement. the term gendarme (english  ) is derived from the medieval french expression gens d armes  which translates to  armed people . in france and some francophone nations  the gendarmerie is a branch of the armed forces responsible for internal security in parts of the territory (primarily in rural areas and small towns in the case of france) with additional duties as a military police for the armed forces. this concept was introduced to several other western european countries during the napoleonic conquests. in the mid twentieth century  a number of former french mandates or colonial possessions such as lebanon  syria  and the republic of the congo adopted a gendarmerie after independence.the growth and expansion of gendarmerie units worldwide has been linked to an increasing reluctance by some governments to use military units typically entrusted with external defense for combating internal threats. a somewhat related phenomenon has been the formation of paramilitary units which fall under the authority of civilian police agencies. since these are not strictly military forces  however  they are not considered gendarmerie.some of the more prominent modern gendarmerie organizations include the french national gendarmerie  spanish civil guard  italian carabinieri  portuguese national republican guard and the turkish gendarmerie.   == etymology == the word gendarme is a singular extracted from old french gens d armes  meaning men-at-arms. during the late medieval to the early modern period  the term referred to a heavily armoured cavalryman of noble birth  primarily serving in the french army. the word gained policing connotations only during the french revolution when the maréchaussée of the ancien régime  attached to the gendarmerie before  by the monarchy  was renamed   gendarmerie . historically  the spelling in english was gendarmery  but now the french spelling gendarmerie is more common. the oxford english dictionary (oed) uses gendarmery as the principal spelling  merriam-webster uses gendarmerie as the principal spelling.   == title and status == these forces are normally titled  gendarmerie  but gendarmeries may bear other titles  for instance the carabinieri in italy  the guarda nacional republicana in portugal  the guardia civil in spain  the royal marechaussee in the netherlands or internal troops/national guard in ukraine and russia. as a result of their duties within the civilian population  gendarmeries are sometimes described as  paramilitary  rather than  military  forces (especially in the english-speaking world where policing is rarely associated with military forces) although this description rarely corresponds to their official status and capabilities. gendarmes are very rarely deployed in military situations  except in humanitarian deployments abroad. a gendarmerie may come under the authority of a ministry of defence (e.g. italy)  a ministry of the interior (e.g. romania  ukraine)  or even both at once (e.g. chile  france  spain and portugal). generally there is some coordination between a ministry of
defence and a ministry of the interior over the use of gendarmes. a few forces which are no longer considered military retain the title  gendarmerie  for reasons of tradition. for instance  the french language title of the royal canadian mounted police is gendarmerie royale du canada (grc) (i.e.  royal gendarmerie of canada) because this force traditionally had some military-style functions (although separate from the canadian army) and has retained its status as a regiment of dragoons. the argentine gendarmerie is a military force in terms of training  identity and public perception  and was involved in combat in the falklands war  however it is classified as a  security force  not an  armed force  to exercise jurisdiction over the civilian population under argentine law. since different countries may make different use of institutional terms such as  gendarmerie  there are cases in which the term may become confusing. for instance  in the french-speaking cantons of switzerland the  gendarmeries  are the uniformed civil police (see  gendarmerie (switzerland)). in chile  the word  gendarmerie  refers for historic reasons to the prison service (the  chilean gendarmerie )  while the actual gendarmerie force is called the  carabineros . in some cases  a police service s military links are ambiguous and it can be unclear whether a force should be defined as a gendarmerie (e.g. mexico s federal police  brazil s military police  or the former british south africa police until 1980). some historical military units  such as south-west africa s koevoet  were only defined as police for political reasons. services such as the italian guardia di finanza would rarely be defined as gendarmeries since the service is of an ambiguous military status and does not have general policing duties amongst the civilian population. in russia  the modern national guard (successor of the internal troops) are military units with quasi-police duties but historically  different bodies within the tsarist special corps of gendarmes performed a variety of functions as an armed rural constabulary  urban riot control units  frontier guards  intelligence agents and political police. prior to the creation of the irish free state in 1922  british rule was based on the royal irish constabulary—a drilled and armed force located in rural  barracks  that was a gendarmerie in all but in name. in 2014 the mexican federal police  a heavily armed force which has many attributes of a gendarmerie  created a new seventh branch of service called the national gendarmerie division. the new force would initially number 5 000 personnel and was created with the assistance of the french gendarmerie.   == role and services == in comparison to civilian police forces  gendarmeries may provide a more disciplined force whose military capabilities (e.g.  armored group in france with armored personnel carriers) make them more capable of dealing with armed groups and with all types of violence. on the other hand  the
necessity of a more stringent selection process for military service  especially in terms of physical prowess and health  restricts the pool of potential recruits in comparison to those from which a civilian police force could select. they also provide a state with flexibility in policing  as the military regulations of a gendarmerie may exempt it from certain gaps in service affecting the civilian police  for example regarding the right to strike. in countries where the gendarmerie and civilian police co-exist there may be rivalries and tensions between the forces. in france  the gendarmerie is in charge of rural areas and small towns (typically less than 10.000 inhabitants) which represent 95% of the territory and close to 50% of the population. besides its territorial organization  it has crowd and riot control units (the gendarmerie mobile  along with some corresponding units in the civilian police)  counter-terrorism and hostage rescue (gign  again along with some corresponding units in the civilian police)  maritime surveillance  police at sea and coast guard (gendarmerie maritime)  control and security at airports and air traffic police (gendarmerie des transports aériens)  official buildings guard  honorary services and protection of the president (garde républicaine)  mountain rescue (peloton de gendarmerie de haute montagne) and security of nuclear weapons sites. in argentina the gendarmería nacional argentina (gna  argentina national gendarmerie) can act as border patrol forces  defending and patrolling the land frontiers  antiterrorism  vip escort missions  hostage situations and special military operations in war times (when the gna is attached to the argentine army) with their 601st special operations squadron  alacran  which took part in the falkland/malvinas conflict. also the gna is responsible for key facilities (such as nuclear facilities) and government building protection and recovery in case of criminal or enemy activities  counter-narcotraffic operations  internal security reinforcement of other provincial and federal security forces  pacification  smuggling control  road controls on federal highways  and counter-sedition activities under martial law. the gna often take part in un peace keeping missions.   == french influence == the use of military organisations to police civilian populations is common to many time periods and cultures. although not wholly a french concept  the french gendarmerie has been the most influential model for such an organisation. many countries that were once under french rule and influence have a gendarmerie. italy  belgium and austria have had gendarmeries through napoleonic influence for instance but  while italy still has the italian equivalent known as the carabinieri  belgium and austria s gendarmeries have merged with the civil police (in  respectively  2001 and 2005). many former french colonies  especially in africa  also have gendarmeries. the dutch royal marechaussee  was created by king william i to replace the french gendarmerie after french rule ended. the national police force of canada  the royal canadian mounted police is referred to in french as the gendarmerie royale du canada (grc). however
the rcmp is a mainly civilian organisation within public safety canada. it is not part of the canadian department of national defence  but does have a paramilitary wing. a common gendarmerie symbol is a flaming grenade  first used as insignia by the french force.   == role in modern conflicts == gendarmes play an important role re-establishing law and order in conflict areas  a task which is suited to their purpose  training and capabilities. gendarmeries are widely used for internal security and in peacekeeping operations  for instance in the former yugoslavia and in ivory coast  sometimes via the european gendarmerie force.   == see also == list of gendarmeries national guard (disambiguation) carabinier security forces paramilitary swat militia coast guard militarization of police european gendarmerie force martial law   == references ==
recruitment refers to the overall process of attracting  shortlisting  selecting and appointing suitable candidates for jobs (either permanent or temporary) within an organization. recruitment can also refer to processes involved in choosing individuals for unpaid roles. managers  human resource generalists and recruitment specialists may be tasked with carrying out recruitment  but in some cases public-sector employment agencies  commercial recruitment agencies  or specialist search consultancies are used to undertake parts of the process. internet-based technologies which support all aspects of recruitment have become widespread.   == process == job analysis for new jobs or substantially changed jobs  a job analysis might be undertaken to document the knowledge  skills  abilities and other characteristics (ksaos) required or sought for the job. from these  the relevant information is captured in a person specification. sourcing is the process of attracting or identifying candidates. screening and selection   == sourcing == sourcing is the use of one or more strategies to attract or identify candidates to fill job vacancies. it may involve internal and/or external recruitment advertising  using appropriate media  such as job portals  local or national newspapers  social media  business media  specialist recruitment media  professional publications  window advertisements  job centers  or in a variety of ways via the internet. alternatively  employers may use recruitment consultancies or agencies to find otherwise scarce candidates—who  in many cases  may be content in the current positions and are not actively looking to move. this initial research for candidates—also called name generation—produces contact information for potential candidates  whom the recruiter can then discreetly contact and screen.   === referral recruitment programs === referral recruitment programs allow both outsiders and employees to refer candidates for filling job openings. online  they can be implemented by leveraging social networks.   === employee referral === an employee referral is a candidate recommended by an existing employee. this is sometimes referred to as referral recruitment encouraging existing employees to select and recruit suitable candidates results in   improved candidate quality ( fit )  and retention (which in the call center industry is around 45% annually.). the one-to-one direct relationship between the candidate and the referring employee and the exchange of knowledge that takes place allows the candidate to develop a strong understanding of the company  its business and the application and recruitment process. the candidate is thereby enabled to assess their own suitability and likelihood of success  including  fitting in.  reduces the considerable cost of third parties service providers who would have previously conducted the screening and selection process. an op-ed in crain s in april 2013 recommended that companies look to employee referral to speed the recruitment process for purple squirrels  which are rare candidates considered to be  perfect  fits for open positions. the employee typically receives a referral bonus  and is widely acknowledged as being cost effective. the global employee referral index 2013 survey found that
92% of the participants reported employee referrals as one of the top recruiting sources for recruiting. as candidate quality improves and interview to job offer conversion rates increase  the amount of time spent interviewing decreases  which means the company s human resources headcount can be streamlined and be used more efficiently. marketing and advertising expenditures decrease as existing employees source potential candidates from the existing personal networks of friends  family and associates. by contrast  recruiting through 3rd-party recruiting agencies incurs a 20–25% agency finder s fee – which can top $25k for an employee with $100k annual salary. referral recruiting can be free (or cost a fraction)there is  however  a risk of less corporate creativity   an  overly homogeneous  workforce is at risk for  fails to produce novel ideas or innovations.    === social network referral === initially  responses to mass-emailing of job announcements to those within employees  social network slowed the screening process. two ways in which this improved are   making available screen tools for employees to use  although this interferes with the   work routines of already time-starved employees   when employees put their reputation on the line for the person they are recommending    == screening and selection == various psychological tests can assess a variety of ksaos  including literacy. assessments are also available to measure physical ability. recruiters and agencies may use applicant tracking systems to filter candidates  along with software tools for psychometric testing and performance-based assessment. in many countries  employers are legally mandated to ensure their screening and selection processes meet equal opportunity and ethical standards.employers are likely to recognize the value of candidates who encompass soft skills  such as interpersonal or team leadership  and the level of drive needed to stay engaged. in fact  many companies  including multinational organizations and those that recruit from a range of nationalities  are also often concerned about whether candidate fits the prevailing company culture and organization as a whole. companies and recruitment agencies are now turning to video screening as a way to notice these skills without the need to invite the candidates in physical. screening as a practice for hiring has undergone continual change over the years and often organizations are using video to maintain the aforementioned standards they set for themselves and the industry.   ==== disabled candidates ==== the word disability carries few positive connotations for most employers. research has shown that employer biases tend to improve through first-hand experience and exposure with proper supports for the employee and the employer making the hiring decisions. as for most companies  money and job stability are two of the contributing factors to the productivity of a disabled employee  which in return equates to the growth and success of a business. hiring disabled workers produce more advantages than disadvantages. there is no difference in the daily production of a disabled worker. given their situation  they are
more likely to adapt to their environmental surroundings and acquaint themselves with equipment  enabling them to solve problems and overcome adversity as with other employees. the u.s. irs grants companies disabled access credit when they meet eligibility criteria.   ==== diversity ==== many major corporations recognize the need for diversity in hiring to compete successfully in a global economy. the challenge is to avoid recruiting staff who are  in the likeness of existing employees  but also to retain a more diverse workforce and work with inclusion strategies to include them in the organisations.    == recruitment process outsourcing == recruitment process outsourcing (rpo) is a form of business process outsourcing (bpo) where a company engages a third party provider to manage all or part of its recruitment process.   == approaches == internal recruitment or internal mobility (not to be confused with internal recruiters) refers to the process of a candidate being selected from the existing workforce to take up a new job in the same organization  perhaps as a promotion  or to provide career development opportunity  or to meet a specific or urgent organizational need. advantages include the organization s familiarity with the employee and their competencies insofar as they are revealed in their current job  and their willingness to trust said employee. it can be quicker and have a lower cost to hire someone internally.an employee referral program is a system where existing employees recommend prospective candidates for the job offered  and usually  if the suggested candidate is hired  the employee receives a cash bonus.niche firms tend to focus on building ongoing relationships with their candidates  as the same candidates may be placed many times throughout their careers. online resources have developed to help find niche recruiters. niche firms also develop knowledge on specific employment trends within their industry of focus (e.g.  the energy industry) and are able to identify demographic shifts such as aging and its impact on the industry.social recruiting is the use of social media for recruiting. mobile recruiting is a recruitment strategy that uses mobile technology to attract  engage and convert candidates. some recruiters work by accepting payments from job seekers  and in return help them to find a job. this is illegal in some countries  such as in the united kingdom  in which recruiters must not charge candidates for their services (although websites such as linkedin may charge for ancillary job-search-related services). such recruiters often refer to themselves as  personal marketers  and  job application services  rather than as recruiters. using multiple-criteria decision analysis tools such as analytic hierarchy process (ahp) and combining it with conventional recruitment methods provides an added advantage by helping the recruiters to make decisions when there are several diverse criteria to be considered or when the applicants lack past experience  for instance  recruitment of fresh university graduates.   == multi tier recruitment model == in some companies where the recruitment volume is high 
it is common to see a multi tier recruitment model where the different sub-functions are grouped together to achieve efficiency. an example of a 3 tier recruitment model   tier 1 - contact/ help desk - this tier acts as the first point of contact where recruitment requests are being raised. if the requests are simple to fulfil or are queries in nature  resolution may take place at this tier tier 2 - administration - this tier manages mainly the administration processes tier 3 - process - this tier manages the process and how the requests get fulfilled   == strategies == a recruitment strategy is a plan an organization enacts to form a recruiting process and establish a candidate pool. an organization uses recruitment strategies to identify a hiring vacancy  establish a timeline  and identify goals throughout the recruitment process. recruitment strategies are typically the responsibility of the human resources department.   === general === organizations define their own recruiting strategies to identify who they will recruit  as well as when  where  and how that recruitment should take place. common recruiting strategies answer the following questions   what type of individuals should be targeted  what recruitment message should be communicated  how can the targeted individuals best be reached  when should the recruitment campaign begin  what should be the nature of a site visit    === practices === organizations develop recruitment objectives  and the recruitment strategy follows these objectives. typically  organizations develop pre- and post-hire objectives and incorporate these objectives into a holistic recruitment strategy. once an organization deploys a recruitment strategy it conducts recruitment activities. this typically starts by advertising a vacant position.   === professional associations === there are numerous professional associations for human resources professionals. such associations typically offer benefits such as member directories  publications  discussion groups  awards  local chapters  vendor relations  government lobbying  and job boards.professional associations also offer a recruitment resource for human resources professionals.   == see also ==   === recruiting companies === list of employment agencies list of employment websites list of executive search firms list of temporary employment agencies   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to recruitment at wikimedia commons
sculpture is the branch of the visual arts that operates in three dimensions. it is one of the plastic arts. durable sculptural processes originally used carving (the removal of material) and modelling (the addition of material  as clay)  in stone  metal  ceramics  wood and other materials but  since modernism  there has been an almost complete freedom of materials and process. a wide variety of materials may be worked by removal such as carving  assembled by welding or modelling  or molded or cast. sculpture in stone survives far better than works of art in perishable materials  and often represents the majority of the surviving works (other than pottery) from ancient cultures  though conversely traditions of sculpture in wood may have vanished almost entirely. however  most ancient sculpture was brightly painted  and this has been lost.sculpture has been central in religious devotion in many cultures  and until recent centuries large sculptures  too expensive for private individuals to create  were usually an expression of religion or politics. those cultures whose sculptures have survived in quantities include the cultures of the ancient mediterranean  india and china  as well as many in central and south america and africa. the western tradition of sculpture began in ancient greece  and greece is widely seen as producing great masterpieces in the classical period. during the middle ages  gothic sculpture represented the agonies and passions of the christian faith. the revival of classical models in the renaissance produced famous sculptures such as michelangelo s david. modernist sculpture moved away from traditional processes and the emphasis on the depiction of the human body  with the making of constructed sculpture  and the presentation of found objects as finished art works.   == types == a basic distinction is between sculpture in the round  free-standing sculpture  such as statues  not attached (except possibly at the base) to any other surface  and the various types of relief  which are at least partly attached to a background surface. relief is often classified by the degree of projection from the wall into low or bas-relief  high relief  and sometimes an intermediate mid-relief. sunk-relief is a technique restricted to ancient egypt. relief is the usual sculptural medium for large figure groups and narrative subjects  which are difficult to accomplish in the round  and is the typical technique used both for architectural sculpture  which is attached to buildings  and for small-scale sculpture decorating other objects  as in much pottery  metalwork and jewellery. relief sculpture may also decorate steles  upright slabs  usually of stone  often also containing inscriptions. another basic distinction is between subtractive carving techniques  which remove material from an existing block or lump  for example of stone or wood  and modelling techniques which shape or build up the work from the material. techniques such as casting  stamping and moulding use an intermediate matrix containing the
design to produce the work  many of these allow the production of several copies.  the term  sculpture  is often used mainly to describe large works  which are sometimes called monumental sculpture  meaning either or both of sculpture that is large  or that is attached to a building. but the term properly covers many types of small works in three dimensions using the same techniques  including coins and medals  hardstone carvings  a term for small carvings in stone that can take detailed work. the very large or  colossal  statue has had an enduring appeal since antiquity  the largest on record at 182 m (597 ft) is the 2018 indian statue of unity. another grand form of portrait sculpture is the equestrian statue of a rider on horse  which has become rare in recent decades. the smallest forms of life-size portrait sculpture are the  head  showing just that  or the bust  a representation of a person from the chest up. small forms of sculpture include the figurine  normally a statue that is no more than 18 inches (46 cm) tall  and for reliefs the plaquette  medal or coin. modern and contemporary art have added a number of non-traditional forms of sculpture  including sound sculpture  light sculpture  environmental art  environmental sculpture  street art sculpture  kinetic sculpture (involving aspects of physical motion)  land art  and site-specific art. sculpture is an important form of public art. a collection of sculpture in a garden setting can be called a sculpture garden.   == purposes and subjects ==  one of the most common purposes of sculpture is in some form of association with religion. cult images are common in many cultures  though they are often not the colossal statues of deities which characterized ancient greek art  like the statue of zeus at olympia. the actual cult images in the innermost sanctuaries of egyptian temples  of which none have survived  were evidently rather small  even in the largest temples. the same is often true in hinduism  where the very simple and ancient form of the lingam is the most common. buddhism brought the sculpture of religious figures to east asia  where there seems to have been no earlier equivalent tradition  though again simple shapes like the bi and cong probably had religious significance. small sculptures as personal possessions go back to the earliest prehistoric art  and the use of very large sculpture as public art  especially to impress the viewer with the power of a ruler  goes back at least to the great sphinx of some 4 500 years ago. in archaeology and art history the appearance  and sometimes disappearance  of large or monumental sculpture in a culture is regarded as of great significance  though tracing the emergence is often complicated by the presumed existence of sculpture in wood and other perishable materials of which
no record remains  the totem pole is an example of a tradition of monumental sculpture in wood that would leave no traces for archaeology. the ability to summon the resources to create monumental sculpture  by transporting usually very heavy materials and arranging for the payment of what are usually regarded as full-time sculptors  is considered a mark of a relatively advanced culture in terms of social organization. recent unexpected discoveries of ancient chinese bronze age figures at sanxingdui  some more than twice human size  have disturbed many ideas held about early chinese civilization  since only much smaller bronzes were previously known.  some undoubtedly advanced cultures  such as the indus valley civilization  appear to have had no monumental sculpture at all  though producing very sophisticated figurines and seals. the mississippian culture seems to have been progressing towards its use  with small stone figures  when it collapsed. other cultures  such as ancient egypt and the easter island culture  seem to have devoted enormous resources to very large-scale monumental sculpture from a very early stage.  the collecting of sculpture  including that of earlier periods  goes back some 2 000 years in greece  china and mesoamerica  and many collections were available on semi-public display long before the modern museum was invented. from the 20th century the relatively restricted range of subjects found in large sculpture expanded greatly  with abstract subjects and the use or representation of any type of subject now common. today much sculpture is made for intermittent display in galleries and museums  and the ability to transport and store the increasingly large works is a factor in their construction. small decorative figurines  most often in ceramics  are as popular today (though strangely neglected by modern and contemporary art) as they were in the rococo  or in ancient greece when tanagra figurines were a major industry  or in east asian and pre-columbian art. small sculpted fittings for furniture and other objects go well back into antiquity  as in the nimrud ivories  begram ivories and finds from the tomb of tutankhamun. portrait sculpture began in egypt  where the narmer palette shows a ruler of the 32nd century bce  and mesopotamia  where we have 27 surviving statues of gudea  who ruled lagash c. 2144–2124 bce. in ancient greece and rome  the erection of a portrait statue in a public place was almost the highest mark of honour  and the ambition of the elite  who might also be depicted on a coin. in other cultures such as egypt and the near east public statues were almost exclusively the preserve of the ruler  with other wealthy people only being portrayed in their tombs. rulers are typically the only people given portraits in pre-columbian cultures  beginning with the olmec colossal heads of about 3 000 years ago. east asian portrait sculpture was entirely religious  with leading clergy being commemorated with statues  especially
the founders of monasteries  but not rulers  or ancestors. the mediterranean tradition revived  initially only for tomb effigies and coins  in the middle ages  but expanded greatly in the renaissance  which invented new forms such as the personal portrait medal. animals are  with the human figure  the earliest subject for sculpture  and have always been popular  sometimes realistic  but often imaginary monsters  in china animals and monsters are almost the only traditional subjects for stone sculpture outside tombs and temples. the kingdom of plants is important only in jewellery and decorative reliefs  but these form almost all the large sculpture of byzantine art and islamic art  and are very important in most eurasian traditions  where motifs such as the palmette and vine scroll have passed east and west for over two millennia. one form of sculpture found in many prehistoric cultures around the world is specially enlarged versions of ordinary tools  weapons or vessels created in impractical precious materials  for either some form of ceremonial use or display or as offerings. jade or other types of greenstone were used in china  olmec mexico  and neolithic europe  and in early mesopotamia large pottery shapes were produced in stone. bronze was used in europe and china for large axes and blades  like the oxborough dirk.   == materials and techniques ==  the materials used in sculpture are diverse  changing throughout history. the classic materials  with outstanding durability  are metal  especially bronze  stone and pottery  with wood  bone and antler less durable but cheaper options. precious materials such as gold  silver  jade  and ivory are often used for small luxury works  and sometimes in larger ones  as in chryselephantine statues. more common and less expensive materials were used for sculpture for wider consumption  including hardwoods (such as oak  box/boxwood  and lime/linden)  terracotta and other ceramics  wax (a very common material for models for casting  and receiving the impressions of cylinder seals and engraved gems)  and cast metals such as pewter and zinc (spelter). but a vast number of other materials have been used as part of sculptures  in ethnographic and ancient works as much as modern ones. sculptures are often painted  but commonly lose their paint to time  or restorers. many different painting techniques have been used in making sculpture  including tempera  oil painting  gilding  house paint  aerosol  enamel and sandblasting.many sculptors seek new ways and materials to make art. one of pablo picasso s most famous sculptures included bicycle parts. alexander calder and other modernists made spectacular use of painted steel. since the 1960s  acrylics and other plastics have been used as well. andy goldsworthy makes his unusually ephemeral sculptures from almost entirely natural materials in natural settings. some sculpture  such as ice sculpture  sand sculpture  and gas sculpture
 is deliberately short-lived. recent sculptors have used stained glass  tools  machine parts  hardware and consumer packaging to fashion their works. sculptors sometimes use found objects  and chinese scholar s rocks have been appreciated for many centuries.   === stone ===  stone sculpture is an ancient activity where pieces of rough natural stone are shaped by the controlled removal of stone. owing to the permanence of the material  evidence can be found that even the earliest societies indulged in some form of stone work  though not all areas of the world have such abundance of good stone for carving as egypt  greece  india and most of europe. petroglyphs (also called rock engravings) are perhaps the earliest form  images created by removing part of a rock surface which remains in situ  by incising  pecking  carving  and abrading. monumental sculpture covers large works  and architectural sculpture  which is attached to buildings. hardstone carving is the carving for artistic purposes of semi-precious stones such as jade  agate  onyx  rock crystal  sard or carnelian  and a general term for an object made in this way. alabaster or mineral gypsum is a soft mineral that is easy to carve for smaller works and still relatively durable. engraved gems are small carved gems  including cameos  originally used as seal rings. the copying of an original statue in stone  which was very important for ancient greek statues  which are nearly all known from copies  was traditionally achieved by  pointing  along with more freehand methods. pointing involved setting up a grid of string squares on a wooden frame surrounding the original  and then measuring the position on the grid and the distance between grid and statue of a series of individual points  and then using this information to carve into the block from which the copy is made.   === metal ===  bronze and related copper alloys are the oldest and still the most popular metals for cast metal sculptures  a cast bronze sculpture is often called simply a  bronze . common bronze alloys have the unusual and desirable property of expanding slightly just before they set  thus filling the finest details of a mold. their strength and lack of brittleness (ductility) is an advantage when figures in action are to be created  especially when compared to various ceramic or stone materials (see marble sculpture for several examples). gold is the softest and most precious metal  and very important in jewellery  with silver it is soft enough to be worked with hammers and other tools as well as cast  repoussé and chasing are among the techniques used in gold and silversmithing. casting is a group of manufacturing processes by which a liquid material (bronze  copper  glass  aluminum  iron) is (usually) poured into a mold  which contains a hollow cavity of the desired shape  and
then allowed to solidify. the solid casting is then ejected or broken out to complete the process  although a final stage of  cold work  may follow on the finished cast. casting may be used to form hot liquid metals or various materials that cold set after mixing of components (such as epoxies  concrete  plaster and clay). casting is most often used for making complex shapes that would be otherwise difficult or uneconomical to make by other methods. the oldest surviving casting is a copper mesopotamian frog from 3200 bce. specific techniques include lost-wax casting  plaster mold casting and sand casting. welding is a process where different pieces of metal are fused together to create different shapes and designs. there are many different forms of welding  such as oxy-fuel welding  stick welding  mig welding  and tig welding. oxy-fuel is probably the most common method of welding when it comes to creating steel sculptures because it is the easiest to use for shaping the steel as well as making clean and less noticeable joins of the steel. the key to oxy-fuel welding is heating each piece of metal to be joined evenly until all are red and have a shine to them. once that shine is on each piece  that shine will soon become a  pool  where the metal is liquified and the welder must get the pools to join together  fusing the metal. once cooled off  the location where the pools joined are now one continuous piece of metal. also used heavily in oxy-fuel sculpture creation is forging. forging is the process of heating metal to a certain point to soften it enough to be shaped into different forms. one very common example is heating the end of a steel rod and hitting the red heated tip with a hammer while on an anvil to form a point. in between hammer swings  the forger rotates the rod and gradually forms a sharpened point from the blunt end of a steel rod.   === glass ===  glass may be used for sculpture through a wide range of working techniques  though the use of it for large works is a recent development. it can be carved  with considerable difficulty  the roman lycurgus cup is all but unique.  hot casting can be done by ladling molten glass into molds that have been created by pressing shapes into sand  carved graphite or detailed plaster/silica molds. kiln casting glass involves heating chunks of glass in a kiln until they are liquid and flow into a waiting mold below it in the kiln. glass can also be blown and/or hot sculpted with hand tools either as a solid mass or as part of a blown object. more recent techniques involve chiseling and bonding plate glass with polymer silicates and uv light.   === pottery === pottery is one of the oldest materials for sculpture  as well as clay being the medium in which many
sculptures cast in metal are originally modelled for casting. sculptors often build small preliminary works called maquettes of ephemeral materials such as plaster of paris  wax  unfired clay  or plasticine.  many cultures have produced pottery which combines a function as a vessel with a sculptural form  and small figurines have often been as popular as they are in modern western culture. stamps and moulds were used by most ancient civilizations  from ancient rome and mesopotamia to china.   === wood carving ===  wood carving has been extremely widely practiced  but survives much less well than the other main materials  being vulnerable to decay  insect damage  and fire. it therefore forms an important hidden element in the art history of many cultures.  outdoor wood sculpture does not last long in most parts of the world  so that we have little idea how the totem pole tradition developed. many of the most important sculptures of china and japan in particular are in wood  and the great majority of african sculpture and that of oceania and other regions. wood is light  so suitable for masks and other sculpture intended to be carried  and can take very fine detail. it is also much easier to work than stone.  it has been very often painted after carving  but the paint wears less well than the wood  and is often missing in surviving pieces.  painted wood is often technically described as  wood and polychrome .  typically a layer of gesso or plaster is applied to the wood  and then the paint is applied to that.   == social status of sculptors ==  worldwide  sculptors have usually been tradesmen whose work is unsigned  in some traditions  for example china  where sculpture did not share the prestige of literati painting  this has affected the status of sculpture itself. even in ancient greece  where sculptors such as phidias became famous  they appear to have retained much the same social status as other artisans  and perhaps not much greater financial rewards  although some signed their works.  in the middle ages artists such as the 12th-century gislebertus sometimes signed their work  and were sought after by different cities  especially from the trecento onwards in italy  with figures such as arnolfo di cambio  and nicola pisano and his son giovanni. goldsmiths and jewellers  dealing with precious materials and often doubling as bankers  belonged to powerful guilds and had considerable status  often holding civic office. many sculptors also practised in other arts  andrea del verrocchio also painted  and giovanni pisano  michelangelo  and jacopo sansovino were architects. some sculptors maintained large workshops. even in the renaissance the physical nature of the work was perceived by leonardo da vinci and others as pulling down the status of sculpture in the arts  though the reputation of michelangelo perhaps put this
long-held idea to rest. from the high renaissance artists such as michelangelo  leone leoni and giambologna could become wealthy  and ennobled  and enter the circle of princes  after a period of sharp argument over the relative status of sculpture and painting.  much decorative sculpture on buildings remained a trade  but sculptors producing individual pieces were recognised on a level with painters. from the 18th century or earlier sculpture also attracted middle-class students  although it was slower to do so than painting. women sculptors took longer to appear than women painters  and were less prominent until the 20th century.   == anti-sculpture movements == aniconism remained restricted to judaism  which did not accept figurative sculpture until the 19th century  before expanding to early christianity  which initially accepted large sculptures. in christianity and buddhism  sculpture became very significant. christian eastern orthodoxy has never accepted monumental sculpture  and islam has consistently rejected nearly all figurative sculpture  except for very small figures in reliefs and some animal figures that fulfill a useful function  like the famous lions supporting a fountain in the alhambra. many forms of protestantism also do not approve of religious sculpture. there has been much iconoclasm of sculpture from religious motives  from the early christians  the beeldenstorm of the protestant reformation to the 2001 destruction of the buddhas of bamyan by the taliban.   == history ==   === prehistoric periods ===   ==== europe ====  the earliest undisputed examples of sculpture belong to the aurignacian culture  which was located in europe and southwest asia and active at the beginning of the upper paleolithic. as well as producing some of the earliest known cave art  the people of this culture developed finely-crafted stone tools  manufacturing pendants  bracelets  ivory beads  and bone-flutes  as well as three-dimensional figurines.the 30 cm tall löwenmensch found in the hohlenstein stadel area of germany is an anthropomorphic lion-man figure carved from woolly mammoth ivory. it has been dated to about 35–40 000 bp  making it  along with the venus of hohle fels  the oldest known uncontested example of figurative art.much surviving prehistoric art is small portable sculptures  with a small group of female venus figurines such as the venus of willendorf (24–26 000 bp) found across central europe.  the swimming reindeer of about 13 000 years ago is one of the finest of a number of magdalenian carvings in bone or antler of animals in the art of the upper paleolithic  although they are outnumbered by engraved pieces  which are sometimes classified as sculpture. two of the largest prehistoric sculptures can be found at the tuc d audobert caves in france  where around 12–17 000 years ago a masterful sculptor used a spatula-like stone tool and fingers to model a pair of large bison in clay against a limestone rock.with the beginning of the mesolithic in europe figurative sculpture greatly reduced 
and remained a less common element in art than relief decoration of practical objects until the roman period  despite some works such as the gundestrup cauldron from the european iron age and the bronze age trundholm sun chariot.   ==== ancient near east ==== from the ancient near east  the over-life sized stone urfa man from modern turkey comes from about 9 000 bce  and the  ain ghazal statues from around 7200 and 6500 bce.  these are from modern jordan  made of lime plaster and reeds  and about half life-size  there are 15 statues  some with two heads side by side  and 15 busts.  small clay figures of people and animals are found at many sites across the near east from the pre-pottery neolithic  and represent the start of a more-or-less continuous tradition in the region.                          === ancient near east ===  the protoliterate period in mesopotamia  dominated by uruk  saw the production of sophisticated works like the warka vase and cylinder seals. the guennol lioness is an outstanding small limestone figure from elam of about 3000–2800 bce  part human and part lioness. a little later there are a number of figures of large-eyed priests and worshippers  mostly in alabaster and up to a foot high  who attended temple cult images of the deity  but very few of these have survived.  sculptures from the sumerian and akkadian period generally had large  staring eyes  and long beards on the men. many masterpieces have also been found at the royal cemetery at ur (c. 2650 bce)  including the two figures of a ram in a thicket  the copper bull and a bull s head on one of the lyres of ur.from the many subsequent periods before the ascendency of the neo-assyrian empire in the 10th century bce mesopotamian art survives in a number of forms  cylinder seals  relatively small figures in the round  and reliefs of various sizes  including cheap plaques of moulded pottery for the home  some religious and some apparently not. the burney relief is an unusually elaborate and relatively large (20 x 15 inches  50 x 37 cm) terracotta plaque of a naked winged goddess with the feet of a bird of prey  and attendant owls and lions. it comes from the 18th or 19th centuries bce  and may also be moulded. stone stelae  votive offerings  or ones probably commemorating victories and showing feasts  are also found from temples  which unlike more official ones lack inscriptions that would explain them  the fragmentary stele of the vultures is an early example of the inscribed type  and the assyrian black obelisk of shalmaneser iii a large and solid late one.the conquest of the whole of mesopotamia and much surrounding territory
by the assyrians created a larger and wealthier state than the region had known before  and very grandiose art in palaces and public places  no doubt partly intended to match the splendour of the art of the neighbouring egyptian empire. unlike earlier states  the assyrians could use easily carved stone from northern iraq  and did so in great quantity.  the assyrians developed a style of extremely large schemes of very finely detailed narrative low reliefs in stone for palaces  with scenes of war or hunting  the british museum has an outstanding collection  including the lion hunt of ashurbanipal and the lachish reliefs showing a campaign. they produced very little sculpture in the round  except for colossal guardian figures of the human-headed lamassu  which are sculpted in high relief on two sides of a rectangular block  with the heads effectively in the round (and also five legs  so that both views seem complete). even before dominating the region they had continued the cylinder seal tradition with designs which are often exceptionally energetic and refined.             === ancient egypt ===  the monumental sculpture of ancient egypt is world-famous  but refined and delicate small works exist in much greater numbers. the egyptians used the distinctive technique of sunk relief  which is well suited to very bright sunlight. the main figures in reliefs adhere to the same figure convention as in painting  with parted legs (where not seated) and head shown from the side  but the torso from the front  and a standard set of proportions making up the figure  using 18  fists  to go from the ground to the hair-line on the forehead. this appears as early as the narmer palette from dynasty i. however  there as elsewhere the convention is not used for minor figures shown engaged in some activity  such as the captives and corpses.  other conventions make statues of males darker than females ones. very conventionalized portrait statues appear from as early as dynasty ii  before 2 780 bce  and with the exception of the art of the amarna period of ahkenaten  and some other periods such as dynasty xii  the idealized features of rulers  like other egyptian artistic conventions  changed little until after the greek conquest.egyptian pharaohs were always regarded as deities  but other deities are much less common in large statues  except when they represent the pharaoh as another deity  however the other deities are frequently shown in paintings and reliefs. the famous row of four colossal statues outside the main temple at abu simbel each show rameses ii  a typical scheme  though here exceptionally large.  small figures of deities  or their animal personifications  are very common  and found in popular materials such as pottery. most larger sculpture survives from egyptian temples or tombs  by dynasty iv (2680–2565 bce)
at the latest the idea of the ka statue was firmly established. these were put in tombs as a resting place for the ka portion of the soul  and so we have a good number of less conventionalized statues of well-off administrators and their wives  many in wood as egypt is one of the few places in the world where the climate allows wood to survive over millennia. the so-called reserve heads  plain hairless heads  are especially naturalistic. early tombs also contained small models of the slaves  animals  buildings and objects such as boats necessary for the deceased to continue his lifestyle in the afterworld  and later ushabti figures.                         === europe ===   ==== ancient greece ====  the first distinctive style of ancient greek sculpture developed in the early bronze age cycladic period (3rd millennium bce)  where marble figures  usually female and small  are represented in an elegantly simplified geometrical style. most typical is a standing pose with arms crossed in front  but other figures are shown in different poses  including a complicated figure of a harpist seated on a chair.the subsequent minoan and mycenaean cultures developed sculpture further  under influence from syria and elsewhere  but it is in the later archaic period from around 650 bce that the kouros developed. these are large standing statues of naked youths  found in temples and tombs  with the kore as the clothed female equivalent  with elaborately dressed hair  both have the  archaic smile . they seem to have served a number of functions  perhaps sometimes representing deities and sometimes the person buried in a grave  as with the kroisos kouros. they are clearly influenced by egyptian and syrian styles  but the greek artists were much more ready to experiment within the style. during the 6th century greek sculpture developed rapidly  becoming more naturalistic  and with much more active and varied figure poses in narrative scenes  though still within idealized conventions. sculptured pediments were added to temples  including the parthenon in athens  where the remains of the pediment of around 520 using figures in the round were fortunately used as infill for new buildings after the persian sack in 480 bce  and recovered from the 1880s on in fresh unweathered condition. other significant remains of architectural sculpture come from paestum in italy  corfu  delphi and the temple of aphaea in aegina (much now in munich).  most greek sculpture originally included at least some colour  the ny carlsberg glyptotek museum in copenhagen  denmark  has done extensive research and recreation of the original colours.                         ===== classical =====  there are fewer original remains
from the first phase of the classical period  often called the severe style  free-standing statues were now mostly made in bronze  which always had value as scrap. the severe style lasted from around 500 in reliefs  and soon after 480 in statues  to about 450. the relatively rigid poses of figures relaxed  and asymmetrical turning positions and oblique views became common  and deliberately sought. this was combined with a better understanding of anatomy and the harmonious structure of sculpted figures  and the pursuit of naturalistic representation as an aim  which had not been present before. excavations at the temple of zeus  olympia since 1829 have revealed the largest group of remains  from about 460  of which many are in the louvre.the  high classical  period lasted only a few decades from about 450 to 400  but has had a momentous influence on art  and retains a special prestige  despite a very restricted number of original survivals. the best known works are the parthenon marbles  traditionally (since plutarch) executed by a team led by the most famous ancient greek sculptor phidias  active from about 465–425  who was in his own day more famous for his colossal chryselephantine statue of zeus at olympia (c. 432)  one of the seven wonders of the ancient world  his athena parthenos (438)  the cult image of the parthenon  and athena promachos  a colossal bronze figure that stood next to the parthenon  all of these are lost but are known from many representations. he is also credited as the creator of some life-size bronze statues known only from later copies whose identification is controversial  including the ludovisi hermes.the high classical style continued to develop realism and sophistication in the human figure  and improved the depiction of drapery (clothes)  using it to add to the impact of active poses. facial expressions were usually very restrained  even in combat scenes. the composition of groups of figures in reliefs and on pediments combined complexity and harmony in a way that had a permanent influence on western art. relief could be very high indeed  as in the parthenon illustration below  where most of the leg of the warrior is completely detached from the background  as were the missing parts  relief this high made sculptures more subject to damage. the late classical style developed the free-standing female nude statue  supposedly an innovation of praxiteles  and developed increasingly complex and subtle poses that were interesting when viewed from a number of angles  as well as more expressive faces  both trends were to be taken much further in the hellenistic period.   ===== hellenistic =====  the hellenistic period is conventionally dated from the death of alexander the great in 323 bce  and ending either with the final conquest of the greek heartlands by rome in 146 bce or with the final defeat of the last remaining
successor-state to alexander s empire after the battle of actium in 31 bce  which also marks the end of republican rome.  it is thus much longer than the previous periods  and includes at least two major phases  a  pergamene  style of experimentation  exuberance and some sentimentality and vulgarity  and in the 2nd century bce a classicising return to a more austere simplicity and elegance  beyond such generalizations dating is typically very uncertain  especially when only later copies are known  as is usually the case. the initial pergamene style was not especially associated with pergamon  from which it takes its name  but the very wealthy kings of that state were among the first to collect and also copy classical sculpture  and also commissioned much new work  including the famous pergamon altar whose sculpture is now mostly in berlin and which exemplifies the new style  as do the   mausoleum at halicarnassus (another of the seven wonders)  the famous laocoön and his sons in the vatican museums  a late example  and the bronze original of the dying gaul (illustrated at top)  which we know was part of a group actually commissioned for pergamon in about 228 bce  from which the ludovisi gaul was also a copy. the group called the farnese bull  possibly a 2nd-century marble original  is still larger and more complex   hellenistic sculpture greatly expanded the range of subjects represented  partly as a result of greater general prosperity  and the emergence of a very wealthy class who had large houses decorated with sculpture  although we know that some examples of subjects that seem best suited to the home  such as children with animals  were in fact placed in temples or other public places. for a much more popular home decoration market there were tanagra figurines  and those from other centres where small pottery figures were produced on an industrial scale  some religious but others showing animals and elegantly dressed ladies. sculptors became more technically skilled in representing facial expressions conveying a wide variety of emotions and the portraiture of individuals  as well representing different ages and races. the reliefs from the mausoleum are rather atypical in that respect  most work was free-standing  and group compositions with several figures to be seen in the round  like the laocoon and the pergamon group celebrating victory over the gauls became popular  having been rare before. the barberini faun  showing a satyr sprawled asleep  presumably after drink  is an example of the moral relaxation of the period  and the readiness to create large and expensive sculptures of subjects that fall short of the heroic.after the conquests of alexander hellenistic culture was dominant in the courts of most of the near east  and some of central asia  and increasingly being adopted by european elites  especially in italy  where greek colonies initially
controlled most of the south. hellenistic art  and artists  spread very widely  and was especially influential in the expanding roman republic and when it encountered buddhism in the easternmost extensions of the hellenistic area. the massive so-called alexander sarcophagus found in sidon in modern lebanon  was probably made there at the start of the period by expatriate greek artists for a hellenized persian governor.  the wealth of the period led to a greatly increased production of luxury forms of small sculpture  including engraved gems and cameos  jewellery  and gold and silverware.                         ==== europe after the greeks ====   ===== roman sculpture =====  early roman art was influenced by the art of greece and that of the neighbouring etruscans  themselves greatly influenced by their greek trading partners. an etruscan speciality was near life size tomb effigies in terracotta  usually lying on top of a sarcophagus lid propped up on one elbow in the pose of a diner in that period. as the expanding roman republic began to conquer greek territory  at first in southern italy and then the entire hellenistic world except for the parthian far east  official and patrician sculpture became largely an extension of the hellenistic style  from which specifically roman elements are hard to disentangle  especially as so much greek sculpture survives only in copies of the roman period. by the 2nd century bce   most of the sculptors working at rome  were greek  often enslaved in conquests such as that of corinth (146 bce)  and sculptors continued to be mostly greeks  often slaves  whose names are very rarely recorded. vast numbers of greek statues were imported to rome  whether as booty or the result of extortion or commerce  and temples were often decorated with re-used greek works.a native italian style can be seen in the tomb monuments  which very often featured portrait busts  of prosperous middle-class romans  and portraiture is arguably the main strength of roman sculpture. there are no survivals from the tradition of masks of ancestors that were worn in processions at the funerals of the great families and otherwise displayed in the home  but many of the busts that survive must represent ancestral figures  perhaps from the large family tombs like the tomb of the scipios or the later mausolea outside the city. the famous bronze head supposedly of lucius junius brutus is very variously dated  but taken as a very rare survival of italic style under the republic  in the preferred medium of bronze. similarly stern and forceful heads are seen on coins of the late republic  and in the imperial period coins as well as busts sent around the empire to be placed in the basilicas of provincial cities were the main visual form of imperial propaganda 
even londinium had a near-colossal statue of nero  though far smaller than the 30-metre-high colossus of nero in rome  now lost.  the romans did not generally attempt to compete with free-standing greek works of heroic exploits from history or mythology  but from early on produced historical works in relief  culminating in the great roman triumphal columns with continuous narrative reliefs winding around them  of which those commemorating trajan (ce 113) and marcus aurelius (by 193) survive in rome  where the ara pacis ( altar of peace  13 bce) represents the official greco-roman style at its most classical and refined. among other major examples are the earlier re-used reliefs on the arch of constantine and the base of the column of antoninus pius (161)  campana reliefs were cheaper pottery versions of marble reliefs and the taste for relief was from the imperial period expanded to the sarcophagus. all forms of luxury small sculpture continued to be patronized  and quality could be extremely high  as in the silver warren cup  glass lycurgus cup  and large cameos like the gemma augustea  gonzaga cameo and the  great cameo of france .  for a much wider section of the population  moulded relief decoration of pottery vessels and small figurines were produced in great quantity and often considerable quality.after moving through a late 2nd-century  baroque  phase  in the 3rd century  roman art largely abandoned  or simply became unable to produce  sculpture in the classical tradition  a change whose causes remain much discussed. even the most important imperial monuments now showed stumpy  large-eyed figures in a harsh frontal style  in simple compositions emphasizing power at the expense of grace. the contrast is famously illustrated in the arch of constantine of 315 in rome  which combines sections in the new style with roundels in the earlier full greco-roman style taken from elsewhere  and the four tetrarchs (c. 305) from the new capital of constantinople  now in venice. ernst kitzinger found in both monuments the same  stubby proportions  angular movements  an ordering of parts through symmetry and repetition and a rendering of features and drapery folds through incisions rather than modelling... the hallmark of the style wherever it appears consists of an emphatic hardness  heaviness and angularity—in short  an almost complete rejection of the classical tradition .this revolution in style shortly preceded the period in which christianity was adopted by the roman state and the great majority of the people  leading to the end of large religious sculpture  with large statues now only used for emperors. however  rich christians continued to commission reliefs for sarcophagi  as in the sarcophagus of junius bassus  and very small sculpture  especially in ivory  was continued by christians  building on the style of the consular diptych.                  
      ===== early medieval and byzantine =====  the early christians were opposed to monumental religious sculpture  though continuing roman traditions in portrait busts and sarcophagus reliefs  as well as smaller objects such as the consular diptych. such objects  often in valuable materials  were also the main sculptural traditions (as far as is known) of the barbaric civilizations of the migration period  as seen in the objects found in the 6th-century burial treasure at sutton hoo  and the jewellery of scythian art and the hybrid christian and animal style productions of insular art. following the continuing byzantine tradition  carolingian art revived ivory carving  often in panels for the treasure bindings of grand illuminated manuscripts  as well as crozier heads and other small fittings. byzantine art  though producing superb ivory reliefs and architectural decorative carving  never returned to monumental sculpture  or even much small sculpture in the round.  however  in the west during the carolingian and ottonian periods there was the beginnings of a production of monumental statues  in courts and major churches. this gradually spread  by the late 10th and 11th century there are records of several apparently life-size sculptures in anglo-saxon churches  probably of precious metal around a wooden frame  like the golden madonna of essen. no anglo-saxon example has survived  and survivals of large non-architectural sculpture from before 1 000 are exceptionally rare. much the finest is the gero cross  of 965–970  which is a crucifix  which was evidently the commonest type of sculpture  charlemagne had set one up in the palatine chapel in aachen around 800. these continued to grow in popularity  especially in germany and italy. the rune stones of the nordic world  the pictish stones of scotland and possibly the high cross reliefs of christian great britain  were northern sculptural traditions that bridged the period of christianization.          ===== romanesque =====  from about 1000 there was a general rebirth of artistic production in all europe  led by general economic growth in production and commerce  and the new style of romanesque art was the first medieval style to be used in the whole of western europe. the new cathedrals and pilgrim s churches were increasingly decorated with architectural stone reliefs  and new focuses for sculpture developed  such as the tympanum over church doors in the 12th century  and the inhabited capital with figures and often narrative scenes. outstanding abbey churches with sculpture include in france vézelay and moissac and in spain silos.romanesque art was characterised by a very vigorous style in both sculpture and painting. the capitals of columns were never more exciting than in this period  when they were often carved with complete scenes with several figures.  the large wooden crucifix was a german innovation right at the start of the period  as were free-standing statues of the enthroned
madonna  but the high relief was above all the sculptural mode of the period. compositions usually had little depth  and needed to be flexible to squeeze themselves into the shapes of capitals  and church typanums  the tension between a tightly enclosing frame  from which the composition sometimes escapes  is a recurrent theme in romanesque art. figures still often varied in size in relation to their importance portraiture hardly existed. objects in precious materials such as ivory and metal had a very high status in the period  much more so than monumental sculpture — we know the names of more makers of these than painters  illuminators or architect-masons. metalwork  including decoration in enamel  became very sophisticated  and many spectacular shrines made to hold relics have survived  of which the best known is the shrine of the three kings at cologne cathedral by nicholas of verdun. the bronze gloucester candlestick and the brass font of 1108–17 now in liège are superb examples  very different in style  of metal casting  the former highly intricate and energetic  drawing on manuscript painting  while the font shows the mosan style at its most classical and majestic. the bronze doors  a triumphal column and other fittings at hildesheim cathedral  the gniezno doors  and the doors of the basilica di san zeno in verona are other substantial survivals. the aquamanile  a container for water to wash with  appears to have been introduced to europe in the 11th century  and often took fantastic zoomorphic forms  surviving examples are mostly in brass. many wax impressions from impressive seals survive on charters and documents  although romanesque coins are generally not of great aesthetic interest.the cloisters cross is an unusually large ivory crucifix  with complex carving including many figures of prophets and others  which has been attributed to one of the relatively few artists whose name is known  master hugo  who also illuminated manuscripts. like many pieces it was originally partly coloured. the lewis chessmen are well-preserved examples of small ivories  of which many pieces or fragments remain from croziers  plaques  pectoral crosses and similar objects.             ===== gothic =====  the gothic period is essentially defined by gothic architecture  and does not entirely fit with the development of style in sculpture in either its start or finish. the facades of large churches  especially around doors  continued to have large typanums  but also rows of sculpted figures spreading around them. the statues on the western (royal) portal at chartres cathedral (c. 1145) show an elegant but exaggerated columnar elongation  but those on the south transept portal  from 1215 to 1220  show a more naturalistic style and increasing detachment from the wall behind  and some awareness of the classical tradition. these trends were continued in the west portal at reims cathedral of a few
years later  where the figures are almost in the round  as became usual as gothic spread across europe.in italy nicola pisano (1258–1278) and his son giovanni developed a style that is often called proto-renaissance  with unmistakable influence from roman sarcophagi and sophisticated and crowded compositions  including a sympathetic handling of nudity  in relief panels on their pulpit of siena cathedral (1265–68)  the fontana maggiore in perugia  and giovanni s pulpit in pistoia of 1301.  another revival of classical style is seen in the international gothic work of claus sluter and his followers in burgundy and flanders around 1400.  late gothic sculpture continued in the north  with a fashion for very large wooden sculpted altarpieces with increasingly virtuoso carving and large numbers agitated expressive figures  most surviving examples are in germany  after much iconoclasm elsewhere. tilman riemenschneider  veit stoss and others continued the style well into the 16th century  gradually absorbing italian renaissance influences.life-size tomb effigies in stone or alabaster became popular for the wealthy  and grand multi-level tombs evolved  with the scaliger tombs of verona so large they had to be moved outside the church. by the 15th century there was an industry exporting nottingham alabaster altar reliefs in groups of panels over much of europe for economical parishes who could not afford stone retables.  small carvings  for a mainly lay and often female market  became a considerable industry in paris and some other centres. types of ivories included small devotional polyptychs  single figures  especially of the virgin  mirror-cases  combs  and elaborate caskets with scenes from romances  used as engagement presents.  the very wealthy collected extravagantly elaborate jewelled and enamelled metalwork  both secular and religious  like the duc de berry s holy thorn reliquary  until they ran short of money  when they were melted down again for cash.                                     ==== renaissance ====  renaissance sculpture proper is often taken to begin with the famous competition for the doors of the florence baptistry in 1403  from which the trial models submitted by the winner  lorenzo ghiberti  and filippo brunelleschi survive. ghiberti s doors are still in place  but were undoubtedly eclipsed by his second pair for the other entrance  the so-called gates of paradise  which took him from 1425 to 1452  and are dazzlingly confident classicizing compositions with varied depths of relief allowing extensive backgrounds. the intervening years had seen ghiberti s early assistant donatello develop with seminal statues including his davids in marble (1408–09) and bronze (1440s)  and his equestrian statue of gattamelata  as well as reliefs. a leading figure in the later period was andrea del verrocchio  best known for his equestrian statue of bartolomeo colleoni
in venice  his pupil leonardo da vinci designed an equine sculpture in 1482 the horse for milan-but only succeeded in making a 24-foot (7.3 m) clay model which was destroyed by french archers in 1499  and his other ambitious sculptural plans were never completed.the period was marked by a great increase in patronage of sculpture by the state for public art and by the wealthy for their homes  especially in italy  public sculpture remains a crucial element in the appearance of historic city centres. church sculpture mostly moved inside just as outside public monuments became common. portrait sculpture  usually in busts  became popular in italy around 1450  with the neapolitan francesco laurana specializing in young women in meditative poses  while antonio rossellino and others more often depicted knobbly-faced men of affairs  but also young children.  the portrait medal invented by pisanello also often depicted women  relief plaquettes were another new small form of sculpture in cast metal. michelangelo was an active sculptor from about 1500 to 1520  and his great masterpieces including his david  pietà  moses  and pieces for the tomb of pope julius ii and medici chapel could not be ignored by subsequent sculptors. his iconic david (1504) has a contrapposto pose  borrowed from classical sculpture. it differs from previous representations of the subject in that david is depicted before his battle with goliath and not after the giant s defeat. instead of being shown victorious  as donatello and verocchio had done  david looks tense and battle ready.                         ==== mannerist ====  as in painting  early italian mannerist sculpture was very largely an attempt to find an original style that would top the achievement of the high renaissance  which in sculpture essentially meant michelangelo  and much of the struggle to achieve this was played out in commissions to fill other places in the piazza della signoria in florence  next to michelangelo s david. baccio bandinelli took over the project of hercules and cacus from the master himself  but it was little more popular than it is now  and maliciously compared by benvenuto cellini to  a sack of melons  though it had a long-lasting effect in apparently introducing relief panels on the pedestal of statues. like other works of his and other mannerists it removes far more of the original block than michelangelo would have done.  cellini s bronze perseus with the head of medusa is certainly a masterpiece  designed with eight angles of view  another mannerist characteristic  but is indeed mannered compared to the davids of michelangelo and donatello.  originally a goldsmith  his famous gold and enamel salt cellar (1543) was his first sculpture  and shows his talent at its best.  as these examples show  the period extended the range of secular
subjects for large works beyond portraits  with mythological figures especially favoured  previously these had mostly been found in small works. small bronze figures for collector s cabinets  often mythological subjects with nudes  were a popular renaissance form at which giambologna  originally flemish but based in florence  excelled in the later part of the century  also creating life-size sculptures  of which two joined the collection in the piazza della signoria. he and his followers devised elegant elongated examples of the figura serpentinata  often of two intertwined figures  that were interesting from all angles.             ==== baroque and rococo ====  in baroque sculpture  groups of figures assumed new importance  and there was a dynamic movement and energy of human forms— they spiralled around an empty central vortex  or reached outwards into the surrounding space. baroque sculpture often had multiple ideal viewing angles  and reflected a general continuation of the renaissance move away from the relief to sculpture created in the round  and designed to be placed in the middle of a large space—elaborate fountains such as bernini s fontana dei quattro fiumi (rome  1651)  or those in the gardens of versailles were a baroque speciality. the baroque style was perfectly suited to sculpture  with gian lorenzo bernini the dominating figure of the age in works such as the ecstasy of st theresa (1647–1652). much baroque sculpture added extra-sculptural elements  for example  concealed lighting  or water fountains  or fused sculpture and architecture to create a transformative experience for the viewer. artists saw themselves as in the classical tradition  but admired hellenistic and later roman sculpture  rather than that of the more  classical  periods as they are seen today.the protestant reformation brought an almost total stop to religious sculpture in much of northern europe  and though secular sculpture  especially for portrait busts and tomb monuments  continued  the dutch golden age has no significant sculptural component outside goldsmithing.  partly in direct reaction  sculpture was as prominent in roman catholicism as in the late middle ages. statues of rulers and the nobility became increasingly popular. in the 18th century much sculpture continued on baroque lines—the trevi fountain was only completed in 1762. rococo style was better suited to smaller works  and arguably found its ideal sculptural form in early european porcelain  and interior decorative schemes in wood or plaster such as those in french domestic interiors and austrian and bavarian pilgrimage churches.             ==== neo-classical ====  the neoclassical style that arrived in the late 18th century gave great emphasis to sculpture. jean-antoine houdon exemplifies the penetrating portrait sculpture the style could produce  and antonio canova s nudes the idealist aspect of the movement. the neoclassical period was one of the great ages of public sculpture  though its 
classical  prototypes were more likely to be roman copies of hellenistic sculptures. in sculpture  the most familiar representatives are the italian antonio canova  the englishman john flaxman and the dane bertel thorvaldsen. the european neoclassical manner also took hold in the united states  where its pinnacle occurred somewhat later and is exemplified in the sculptures of hiram powers.             === asia ===   ==== greco-buddhist sculpture and asia ====  greco-buddhist art is the artistic manifestation of greco-buddhism  a cultural syncretism between the classical greek culture and buddhism  which developed over a period of close to 1000 years in central asia  between the conquests of alexander the great in the 4th century bce  and the islamic conquests of the 7th century ce. greco-buddhist art is characterized by the strong idealistic realism of hellenistic art and the first representations of the buddha in human form  which have helped define the artistic (and particularly  sculptural) canon for buddhist art throughout the asian continent up to the present. though dating is uncertain  it appears that strongly hellenistic styles lingered in the east for several centuries after they had declined around the mediterranean  as late as the 5th century ce. some aspects of greek art were adopted while others did not spread beyond the greco-buddhist area  in particular the standing figure  often with a relaxed pose and one leg flexed  and the flying cupids or victories  who became popular across asia as apsaras. greek foliage decoration was also influential  with indian versions of the corinthian capital appearing.the origins of greco-buddhist art are to be found in the hellenistic greco-bactrian kingdom (250–130 bce)  located in today s afghanistan  from which hellenistic culture radiated into the indian subcontinent with the establishment of the small indo-greek kingdom (180–10 bce). under the indo-greeks and then the kushans  the interaction of greek and buddhist culture flourished in the area of gandhara  in today s northern pakistan  before spreading further into india  influencing the art of mathura  and then the hindu art of the gupta empire  which was to extend to the rest of south-east asia. the influence of greco-buddhist art also spread northward towards central asia  strongly affecting the art of the tarim basin and the dunhuang caves  and ultimately the sculpted figure in china  korea  and japan.                      ==== china ====  chinese ritual bronzes from the shang and western zhou dynasties come from a period of over a thousand years from c. 1500 bce  and have exerted a continuing influence over chinese art. they are cast with complex patterned and zoomorphic decoration  but avoid the human figure  unlike the huge figures only recently discovered at sanxingdui.  the spectacular terracotta army was assembled for the
tomb of qin shi huang  the first emperor of a unified china from 221–210 bce  as a grand imperial version of the figures long placed in tombs to enable the deceased to enjoy the same lifestyle in the afterlife as when alive  replacing actual sacrifices of very early periods. smaller figures in pottery or wood were placed in tombs for many centuries afterwards  reaching a peak of quality in tang dynasty tomb figures.  the tradition of unusually large pottery figures persisted in china  through tang sancai tomb figures to later buddhist statues such as the near life-size set of yixian glazed pottery luohans and later figures for temples and tombs.  these came to replace earlier equivalents in wood. native chinese religions do not usually use cult images of deities  or even represent them  and large religious sculpture is nearly all buddhist  dating mostly from the 4th to the 14th century  and initially using greco-buddhist models arriving via the silk road. buddhism is also the context of all large portrait sculpture  in total contrast to some other areas  in medieval china even painted images of the emperor were regarded as private. imperial tombs have spectacular avenues of approach lined with real and mythological animals on a scale matching egypt  and smaller versions decorate temples and palaces.small buddhist figures and groups were produced to a very high quality in a range of media  as was relief decoration of all sorts of objects  especially in metalwork and jade.  in the earlier periods  large quantities of sculpture were cut from the living rock in pilgrimage cave-complexes  and as outside rock reliefs.  these were mostly originally painted.  in notable contrast to literati painters  sculptors of all sorts were regarded as artisans and very few names are recorded.  from the ming dynasty onwards  statuettes of religious and secular figures were produced in chinese porcelain and other media  which became an important export.                                              ==== japan ====  towards the end of the long neolithic jōmon period  some pottery vessels were  flame-rimmed  with extravagant extensions to the rim that can only be called sculptural  and very stylized pottery dogū figures were produced  many with the characteristic  snow-goggle  eyes. during the kofun period of the 3rd to 6th century ce  haniwa terracotta figures of humans and animals in a simplistic style were erected outside important tombs. the arrival of buddhism in the 6th century brought with it sophisticated traditions in sculpture  chinese styles mediated via korea. the 7th-century hōryū-ji and its contents have survived more intact than any east asian buddhist temple of its date  with works including a shaka trinity
of 623 in bronze  showing the historical buddha flanked by two bodhisattvas and also the guardian kings of the four directions.the wooden image (9th century) of shakyamuni  the  historic  buddha  enshrined in a secondary building at the murō-ji  is typical of the early heian sculpture  with its ponderous body  covered by thick drapery folds carved in the hompa-shiki (rolling-wave) style  and its austere  withdrawn facial expression. the kei school of sculptors  particularly unkei  created a new  more realistic style of sculpture. almost all subsequent significant large sculpture in japan was buddhist  with some shinto equivalents  and after buddhism declined in japan in the 15th century  monumental sculpture became largely architectural decoration and less significant.  however sculptural work in the decorative arts was developed to a remarkable level of technical achievement and refinement in small objects such as inro and netsuke in many materials  and metal tosogu or japanese sword mountings. in the 19th century there were export industries of small bronze sculptures of extreme virtuosity  ivory and porcelain figurines  and other types of small sculpture  increasingly emphasizing technical accomplishment.                               ==== india ====  the first known sculpture in the indian subcontinent is from the indus valley civilization (3300–1700 bce)  found in sites at mohenjo-daro and harappa in modern-day pakistan. these include the famous small bronze female dancer. however  such figures in bronze and stone are rare and greatly outnumbered by pottery figurines and stone seals  often of animals or deities very finely depicted. after the collapse of the indus valley civilization there is little record of sculpture until the buddhist era  apart from a hoard of copper figures of (somewhat controversially) c. 1500 bce from daimabad.  thus the great tradition of indian monumental sculpture in stone appears to begin  relative to other cultures  and the development of indian civilization  relatively late  with the reign of asoka from 270 to 232 bce  and the pillars of ashoka he erected around india  carrying his edicts and topped by famous sculptures of animals  mostly lions  of which six survive.  large amounts of figurative sculpture  mostly in relief  survive from early buddhist pilgrimage stupas  above all sanchi  these probably developed out of a tradition using wood that also embraced hinduism.the pink sandstone hindu  jain and buddhist sculptures of mathura from the 1st to 3rd centuries ce reflected both native indian traditions and the western influences received through the greco-buddhist art of gandhara  and effectively established the basis for subsequent indian religious sculpture.  the style was developed and diffused through most of india under the gupta empire (c. 320–550) which remains a  classical  period for indian sculpture  covering the earlier ellora caves
 though the elephanta caves are probably slightly later.  later large-scale sculpture remains almost exclusively religious  and generally rather conservative  often reverting to simple frontal standing poses for deities  though the attendant spirits such as apsaras and yakshi often have sensuously curving poses. carving is often highly detailed  with an intricate backing behind the main figure in high relief. the celebrated bronzes of the chola dynasty (c. 850–1250) from south india  many designed to be carried in processions  include the iconic form of shiva as nataraja  with the massive granite carvings of mahabalipuram dating from the previous pallava dynasty.                                        ==== south-east asia ====  the sculpture of the region tends to be characterised by a high degree of ornamentation  as seen in the great monuments of hindu and buddhist khmer sculpture (9th to 13th centuries) at angkor wat and elsewhere  the enormous 9th-century buddhist complex at borobudur in java  and the hindu monuments of bali. both of these include many reliefs as well as figures in the round  borobudur has 2 672 relief panels  504 buddha statues  many semi-concealed in openwork stupas  and many large guardian figures. in thailand and laos  sculpture was mainly of buddha images  often gilded  both large for temples and monasteries  and small figurines for private homes. traditional sculpture in myanmar emerged before the bagan period. as elsewhere in the region  most of the wood sculptures of the bagan and ava periods have been lost. in later periods chinese influence predominated in vietnam  laos and cambodia  and more wooden sculpture survives from across the region.                                     === islam ===  islam is famously aniconic  so the vast majority of sculpture is arabesque decoration in relief or openwork  based on vegetable motifs  but tending to geometrical abstract forms. in the very early mshatta facade (740s)  now mostly in berlin  there are animals within the dense arabesques in high relief  and figures of animals and men in mostly low relief are found in conjunction with decoration on many later pieces in various materials  including metalwork  ivory and ceramics.figures of animals in the round were often acceptable for works used in private contexts if the object was clearly practical  so medieval islamic art contains many metal animals that are aquamaniles  incense burners or supporters for fountains  as in the stone lions supporting the famous one in the alhambra  culminating in the largest medieval islamic animal figure known  the pisa griffin. in the
same way  luxury hardstone carvings such as dagger hilts and cups may be formed as animals  especially in mughal art. the degree of acceptability of such relaxations of strict islamic rules varies between periods and regions  with islamic spain  persia and india often leading relaxation  and is typically highest in courtly contexts.             === africa ===  historically  with the exception of some monumental egyptian sculpture  most african sculpture was created in wood and other organic materials that have not survived from earlier than a few centuries ago  older pottery figures are found from a number of areas. masks are important elements in the art of many peoples  along with human figures  often highly stylized. there is a vast variety of styles  often varying within the same context of origin depending on the use of the object  but wide regional trends are apparent  sculpture is most common among  groups of settled cultivators in the areas drained by the niger and congo rivers  in west africa.  direct images of deities are relatively infrequent  but masks in particular are or were often made for religious ceremonies  today many are made for tourists as  airport art .  african masks were an influence on european modernist art  which was inspired by their lack of concern for naturalistic depiction. the nubian kingdom of kush in modern sudan was in close and often hostile contact with egypt  and produced monumental sculpture mostly derivative of styles to the north. in west africa  the earliest known sculptures are from the nok culture which thrived between 500 bce and 500 ce in modern nigeria  with clay figures typically with elongated bodies and angular shapes. later west african cultures developed bronze casting for reliefs to decorate palaces like the famous benin bronzes  and very fine naturalistic royal heads from around the yoruba town of ife in terracotta and metal from the 12th–14th centuries. akan goldweights are a form of small metal sculptures produced over the period 1400–1900  some apparently representing proverbs and so with a narrative element rare in african sculpture  and royal regalia included impressive gold sculptured elements.many west african figures are used in religious rituals and are often coated with materials placed on them for ceremonial offerings. the mande-speaking peoples of the same region make pieces of wood with broad  flat surfaces and arms and legs are shaped like cylinders. in central africa  however  the main distinguishing characteristics include heart-shaped faces that are curved inward and display patterns of circles and dots. populations in the african great lakes are not known for their sculpture. however  one style from the region is pole sculptures  carved in human shapes and decorated with geometric forms  while the tops are carved with figures of animals  people  and various objects. these poles are  then  placed next to
graves and are associated with death and the ancestral world. the culture known from great zimbabwe left more impressive buildings than sculpture but the eight soapstone zimbabwe birds appear to have had a special significance and were mounted on monoliths. modern zimbabwean sculptors in soapstone have achieved considerable international success. southern africa s oldest known clay figures date from 400 to 600 ce and have cylindrical heads with a mixture of human and animal features.                         ==== ethiopia and eritrea ====  the creation of sculptures in ethiopia and eritrea can be traced back to its ancient past with the kingdoms of dʿmt and aksum. christian art was established in ethiopia with the conversion from paganism to christianity in the 4th century ce  during the reign of king ezana of axum. christian imagery decorated churches during the asksumite period and later eras. for instance  at lalibela  life-size saints were carved into the church of bet golgotha  by tradition these were made during the reign of the zagwe ruler gebre mesqel lalibela in the 12th century  but they were more likely crafted in the 15th century during the solomonic dynasty. however  the church of saint george  lalibela  one of several examples of rock cut architecture at lalibela containing intricate carvings  was built in the 10th–13th centuries as proven by archaeology.                ==== sudan ====  in ancient sudan  the development of sculpture stretches from the simple pottery of the kerma culture beginning around 2500 bc to the monumental statuary and architecture of the kingdom of kush  its last phase—the meroitic period—ending around 350 ce (with its conquest by ethiopia s aksum). beyond pottery items  the kerma culture also made furniture that contained sculptures  such as gold cattle hoofs as the legs of beds. sculpture during the kingdom of kush included full-sized statues (especially of kings and queens)  smaller figurines (most commonly depicting royal servants)  and reliefs in stone  which were influenced by the contemporary ancient egyptian sculptural tradition.                   === the americas ===  sculpture in what is now latin america developed in two separate and distinct areas  mesoamerica in the north and peru in the south. in both areas  sculpture was initially of stone  and later of terracotta and metal as the civilizations in these areas became more technologically proficient. the mesoamerican region produced more monumental sculpture  from the massive block-like works of the olmec and toltec cultures  to the superb low reliefs that characterize the mayan and aztec cultures. in the andean region  sculptures were typically small  but often show superb skill.   ==== pre-columbian ====       
                                         === moving toward modern art ===   ==== north america ====  in north america  wood was sculpted for totem poles  masks  utensils  war canoes and a variety of other uses  with distinct variation between different cultures and regions. the most developed styles are those of the pacific northwest coast  where a group of elaborate and highly stylized formal styles developed forming the basis of a tradition that continues today. in addition to the famous totem poles  painted and carved house fronts were complemented by carved posts inside and out  as well as mortuary figures and other items. among the inuit of the far north  traditional carving styles in ivory and soapstone are still continued.the arrival of european catholic culture readily adapted local skills to the prevailing baroque style  producing enormously elaborate retablos and other mostly church sculptures in a variety of hybrid styles. the most famous of such examples in canada is the altar area of the notre dame basilica in montreal  quebec  which was carved by peasant habitant labourers. later  artists trained in the western academic tradition followed european styles until in the late 19th century they began to draw again on indigenous influences  notably in the mexican baroque grotesque style known as churrigueresque. aboriginal peoples also adapted church sculpture in variations on carpenter gothic  one famous example is the church of the holy cross in skookumchuck hot springs  british columbia. the history of sculpture in the united states after europeans  arrival reflects the country s 18th-century foundation in roman republican civic values and protestant christianity. compared to areas colonized by the spanish  sculpture got off to an extremely slow start in the british colonies  with next to no place in churches  and was only given impetus by the need to assert nationality after independence. american sculpture of the mid- to late-19th century was often classical  often romantic  but showed a bent for a dramatic  narrative  almost journalistic realism. public buildings during the last quarter of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century often provided an architectural setting for sculpture  especially in relief. by the 1930s the international style of architecture and design and art deco characterized by the work of paul manship and lee lawrie and others became popular. by the 1950s  traditional sculpture education would almost be completely replaced by a bauhaus-influenced concern for abstract design. minimalist sculpture replaced the figure in public settings and architects almost completely stopped using sculpture in or on their designs. modern sculptors (21st century) use both classical and abstract inspired designs. beginning in the 1980s  there was a swing back toward figurative public sculpture  by 2000  many
of the new public pieces in the united states were figurative in design.                         === 19th–early 20th century  early modernism and continuing realism ===                                modern classicism contrasted in many ways with the classical sculpture of the 19th century which was characterized by commitments to naturalism (antoine-louis barye)—the melodramatic (françois rude) sentimentality (jean-baptiste carpeaux)—or a kind of stately grandiosity (lord leighton). several different directions in the classical tradition were taken as the century turned  but the study of the live model and the post-renaissance tradition was still fundamental to them. auguste rodin was the most renowned european sculptor of the early 20th century. he is often considered a sculptural impressionist  as are his students including camille claudel  and hugo rheinhold  attempting to model of a fleeting moment of ordinary life. modern classicism showed a lesser interest in naturalism and a greater interest in formal stylization. greater attention was paid to the rhythms of volumes and spaces—as well as greater attention to the contrasting qualities of surface (open  closed  planar  broken etc.) while less attention was paid to story-telling and convincing details of anatomy or costume. greater attention was given to psychological effect than to physical realism  and influences from earlier styles worldwide were used. early masters of modern classicism included  aristide maillol  alexander matveyev  joseph bernard  antoine bourdelle  georg kolbe  libero andreotti  gustav vigeland  jan stursa  constantin brâncuși. as the century progressed  modern classicism was adopted as the national style of the two great european totalitarian empires  nazi germany and soviet russia  who co-opted the work of earlier artists such as kolbe and wilhelm lehmbruck in germany and matveyev in russia. over the 70 years of the ussr  new generations of sculptors were trained and chosen within their system  and a distinct style  socialist realism  developed  that returned to the 19th century s emphasis on melodrama and naturalism. classical training was rooted out of art education in western europe (and the americas) by 1970 and the classical variants of the 20th century were marginalized in the history of modernism. but classicism continued as the foundation of art education in the soviet academies until 1990  providing a foundation for expressive figurative art throughout eastern europe and parts of the middle east. by the year 2000  the european classical tradition retains a wide appeal to the public but awaits an educational tradition to revive its contemporary development. some of the modern classical became either more decorative/art deco (paul manship  jose de creeft  carl milles) or more abstractly stylized or more expressive (and gothic) (anton hanak  wilhelm lehmbruck  ernst barlach
 arturo martini)—or turned more to the renaissance (giacomo manzù  venanzo crocetti) or stayed the same (charles despiau  marcel gimond).   == modernism ==  modernist sculpture movements include cubism  geometric abstraction  de stijl  suprematism  constructivism  dadaism  surrealism  futurism  formalism abstract expressionism  pop-art  minimalism  land art  and installation art among others.  in the early days of the 20th century  pablo picasso revolutionized the art of sculpture when he began creating his constructions fashioned by combining disparate objects and materials into one constructed piece of sculpture  the sculptural equivalent of the collage in two-dimensional art. the advent of surrealism led to things occasionally being described as  sculpture  that would not have been so previously  such as  involuntary sculpture  in several senses  including coulage. in later years picasso became a prolific potter  leading  with interest in historic pottery from around the world  to a revival of ceramic art  with figures such as george e. ohr and subsequently peter voulkos  kenneth price  and robert arneson. marcel duchamp originated the use of the  found object  (french  objet trouvé) or readymade with pieces such as fountain (1917). similarly  the work of constantin brâncuși at the beginning of the century paved the way for later abstract sculpture. in revolt against the naturalism of rodin and his late-19th-century contemporaries  brâncuși distilled subjects down to their essences as illustrated by the elegantly refined forms of his bird in space series (1924).brâncuși s impact  with his vocabulary of reduction and abstraction  is seen throughout the 1930s and 1940s  and exemplified by artists such as gaston lachaise  sir jacob epstein  henry moore  alberto giacometti  joan miró  julio gonzález  pablo serrano  jacques lipchitz and by the 1940s abstract sculpture was impacted and expanded by alexander calder  len lye  jean tinguely  and frederick kiesler who were pioneers of kinetic art. modernist sculptors largely missed out on the huge boom in public art resulting from the demand for war memorials for the two world wars  but from the 1950s the public and commissioning bodies became more comfortable with modernist sculpture and large public commissions both abstract and figurative became common. picasso was commissioned to make a maquette for a huge 50-foot (15 m)-high public sculpture  the so-called chicago picasso (1967). his design was ambiguous and somewhat controversial  and what the figure represents is not clear  it could be a bird  a horse  a woman or a totally abstract shape. during the late 1950s and the 1960s abstract sculptors began experimenting with a wide array of new materials and different approaches to creating their work. surrealist imagery  anthropomorphic abstraction  new materials and combinations of new energy sources and varied surfaces and objects became characteristic of much new modernist sculpture. collaborative projects with landscape designers  architects  and landscape architects
expanded the outdoor site and contextual integration. artists such as isamu noguchi  david smith  alexander calder  jean tinguely  richard lippold  george rickey  louise bourgeois  and louise nevelson came to characterize the look of modern sculpture. by the 1960s abstract expressionism  geometric abstraction and minimalism  which reduces sculpture to its most essential and fundamental features  predominated. some works of the period are  the cubi works of david smith  and the welded steel works of sir anthony caro  as well as welded sculpture by a large variety of sculptors  the large-scale work of john chamberlain  and environmental installation scale works by mark di suvero. other minimalists include tony smith  donald judd  robert morris  anne truitt  giacomo benevelli  arnaldo pomodoro  richard serra  dan flavin  carl andre  and john safer who added motion and monumentality to the theme of purity of line.during the 1960s and 1970s figurative sculpture by modernist artists in stylized forms was made by artists such as leonard baskin  ernest trova  george segal  marisol escobar  paul thek  robert graham in a classic articulated style  and fernando botero bringing his painting s  oversized figures  into monumental sculptures.   === gallery of modernist sculpture ===                                                             === contemporary movements ===  site specific and environmental art works are represented by artists  andy goldsworthy  walter de maria  richard long  richard serra  robert irwin  george rickey and christo and jeanne-claude led contemporary abstract sculpture in new directions. artists created environmental sculpture on expansive sites in the  land art in the american west  group of projects. these land art or  earth art  environmental scale sculpture works exemplified by artists such as robert smithson  michael heizer  james turrell (roden crater). eva hesse  sol lewitt  jackie winsor  keith sonnier  bruce nauman and dennis oppenheim among others were pioneers of postminimalist sculpture. also during the 1960s and 1970s artists as diverse as eduardo paolozzi  chryssa  claes oldenburg  george segal  edward kienholz  nam june paik  wolf vostell  duane hanson  and john deandrea explored abstraction  imagery and figuration through video art  environment  light sculpture  and installation art in new ways. conceptual art is art in which the concept(s) or idea(s) involved in the work take precedence over traditional aesthetic and material concerns. works include one and three chairs  1965  is by joseph kosuth  and an oak tree by michael craig-martin  and those of joseph beuys  james turrell and
jacek tylicki.   === minimalism ===                ==== postminimalism ====                   ==== contemporary genres ====  some modern sculpture forms are now practiced outdoors  as environmental art and environmental sculpture  often in full view of spectators. light sculpture  street art sculpture and site-specific art also often make use of the environment. ice sculpture is a form of ephemeral sculpture that uses ice as the raw material. it is popular in china  japan  canada  sweden  and russia. ice sculptures feature decoratively in some cuisines  especially in asia. kinetic sculptures are sculptures that are designed to move  which include mobiles. snow sculptures are usually carved out of a single block of snow about 6 to 15 feet (1.8 to 4.6 m) on each side and weighing about 20–30 tons. the snow is densely packed into a form after having been produced by artificial means or collected from the ground after a snowfall. sound sculptures take the form of indoor sound installations  outdoor installations such as aeolian harps  automatons  or be more or less near conventional musical instruments. sound sculpture is often site-specific. art toys have become another format for contemporary artists since the late 1990s  such as those produced by takashi murakami and kid robot  designed by michael lau  or hand-made by michael leavitt (artist).   == conservation ==  sculptures are sensitive to environmental conditions such as temperature  humidity and exposure to light and ultraviolet light. acid rain can also cause damage to certain building materials and historical monuments. this results when sulfuric acid in the rain chemically reacts with the calcium compounds in the stones (limestone  sandstone  marble and granite) to create gypsum  which then flakes off. at any time many contemporary sculptures have usually been on display in public places  theft was not a problem as pieces were instantly recognisable. in the early 21st century the value of metal rose to such an extent that theft of massive bronze sculpture for the value of the metal became a problem  sculpture worth millions being stolen and melted down for the relatively low value of the metal  a tiny fraction of the value of the artwork.   == see also ==   == notes ==   == references == boucher  bruce  italian baroque sculpture  1998  thames & hudson (world of art)  isbn 0-500-20307-5 blunt anthony  artistic theory in italy  1450–1660  oup  1940 (refs to 1985 edn)  isbn 0-19-881050-4 boardman  john ed.  the oxford history of classical art  oup  1993  isbn 0-19-814386-9 briggs  philip (2015) [1995]. ethiopia. chalfont st peter  bradt travel guides. isbn 978-1-84162-922-3. burnett  andrew  coins  interpreting the past  university of california/british museum
 1991  isbn 0-520-07628-1 calkins  robert g.  monuments of medieval art  dutton  1979  isbn 0-525-47561-3 cherry  john. the holy thorn reliquary  2010  british museum press (british museum objects in focus)  isbn 0-7141-2820-1 cook  r.m.  greek art  penguin  1986 (reprint of 1972)  isbn 0-14-021866-1 de lorenzi  james (2015). guardians of the tradition  historians and historical writing in ethiopia and eritrea. rochester  university of rochester press. isbn 978-1-58046-519-9. dodwell  c.r.  anglo-saxon art  a new perspective  1982  manchester university press  isbn 0-7190-0926-x frankfort  henri  the art and architecture of the ancient orient  pelican history of art  4th ed 1970  penguin (now yale history of art)  isbn 0-14-056107-2 harkless  necia desiree (2006). nubian pharaohs and meroitic kings  the kingdom of kush. bloomington  indiana  authorhouse. isbn 1-4259-4496-5. harle  j. c.  the art and architecture of the indian subcontinent  2nd edn. 1994  yale university press pelican history of art  isbn 0-300-06217-6 henderson  george. gothic  1967  penguin  isbn 0-14-020806-2 henig  martin (ed.)  a handbook of roman art  phaidon  1983  isbn 0-7148-2214-0 paine  robert treat  in  paine  r. t.  & a. soper  the art and architecture of japan  3rd edn 1981  yale university press pelican history of art  isbn 0-14-056108-0 hugh honour and john fleming  a world history of art  1st edn. 1982 (many later editions)  macmillan  london  page refs to 1984 macmillan 1st edn paperback. isbn 0-333-37185-2 howgego  christopher  ancient history from coins  routledge  1995  isbn 0-415-08993-x kitzinger  ernst  byzantine art in the making  main lines of stylistic development in mediterranean art  3rd–7th century  1977  faber & faber  isbn 0-571-11154-8 (us  cambridge up  1977) olson  roberta j. m.  italian renaissance sculpture  1992  thames & hudson (world of art)  isbn 978-0-500-20253-1 rawson  jessica (ed.). the british museum book of chinese art  2007 (2nd edn)  british museum press  isbn 978-0-7141-2446-9 piotrovsky  m. b.  and j. m. rogers (eds)  heaven on earth  art from islamic lands  2004  prestel  isbn 3-7913-3055-1 robinson  james  masterpieces of medieval art  2008  british museum press  isbn 978-0-7141-2815-3 sandars  nancy k.  prehistoric art in europe  penguin (pelican  now yale  history of art)  1968 (nb 1st edn.  early datings now superseded) scholten  frits (2011). european sculpture and metalwork. new york  the metropolitan museum of art. isbn 978-1-58839-441-5. sickman  laurence  in  sickman l.  & a. soper   the art and architecture of china  pelican history of art  3rd edn 1971  penguin (now yale history of art)  loc 70-125675 simon  joshua. neomaterialism  berlin 
sternberg press  2013  isbn 978-3-943365-08-5 smith  w. stevenson  and simpson  william kelly. the art and architecture of ancient egypt  3rd edn. 1998  yale university press (penguin/yale history of art)  isbn 0-300-07747-5 snyder  james. northern renaissance art  1985  harry n. abrams  isbn 0-13-623596-4 sobania  neal w. (2012)   lalibela  in akyeampong  emmanuel  gates  henry louis  jr.  dictionary of african biography  oxford  oxford university press  p. 462  isbn 978-0-19-538207-5. sobania  neal w. (2012).  lalibela  in akyeampong  emmanuel  gates  henry louis  jr.  dictionary of african biography. oxford  oxford university press. isbn 978-0-19-538207-5. strong  donald  et al.  roman art  1995 (2nd edn)  yale university press (penguin/yale history of art)  isbn 0-300-05293-6 williams  dyfri. masterpieces of classical art  2009  british museum press  isbn 978-0-7141-2254-0   == external links == sculpture  hub  at the victoria and albert museum corning museum of glass cass sculpture foundation  a charity dedicated to commissioning monumental sculpture. archive.org the encyclopædia britannica eleventh edition  sculpture  pp. 488–517 current research on polychromy on ancient sculpture at the ny carlsberg glyptotek [4]
a librarian is a person who works professionally in a library  providing access to information and sometimes social or technical programming to users. in addition  librarians provide instruction on information literacy.   == duties and functions == traditionally  a librarian is associated with collections of books  as demonstrated by the etymology of the word  librarian  (from the latin liber   book ). the role of a librarian is continually evolving to meet social and technological needs. a modern librarian may deal with provision and maintenance of information in many formats  including  books  electronic resources  magazines  newspapers  audio and video recordings  maps  manuscripts  photographs and other graphic material  bibliographic databases  and web-based and digital resources. a librarian may also provide other information services  including  information literacy instruction  computer provision and training  coordination with community groups to host public programs  assistive technology for people with disabilities  and assistance locating community resources. appreciation for librarians is often included by authors and scholars in the acknowledgment sections of books.   == history ==   === the ancient world === the sumerians were the first to train clerks to keep records of accounts.  masters of the books  or  keepers of the tablets  were scribes or priests who were trained to handle the vast amount and complexity of these records. the extent of their specific duties is unknown.sometime in the 8th century bc  ashurbanipal  king of assyria  created a library at his palace in nineveh in mesopotamia. ashurbanipal was the first individual in history to introduce librarianship as a profession. we know of at least one  keeper of the books  who was employed to oversee the thousands of tablets on sumerian and babylonian materials  including literary texts  history  omens  astronomical calculations  mathematical tables  grammatical and linguistic tables  dictionaries  and commercial records and laws. all of these tablets were cataloged and arranged in logical order by subject or type  each having an identification tag.the great library of alexandria  created by ptolemy i after the death of alexander the great in 323 bc  was created to house the entirety of greek literature. it was notable for its famous librarians  demetrius  zenodotus  eratosthenes  apollonius  aristophanes  aristarchus  and callimachus. these scholars contributed significantly to the collection and cataloging of the wide variety of scrolls in the library s collection. most notably  callimachus created what is considered to be the first subject catalogue of the library holdings  called the pinakes. the pinakes contained 120 scrolls arranged into ten subject classes  each class was then subdivided  listing authors alphabetically by titles. the librarians at alexandria were considered the  custodians of learning .near the end of the roman republic and the beginning of the roman empire  it was common for roman aristocrats to hold private
libraries in their home. many of these aristocrats  such as cicero  kept the contents of their private libraries to themselves  only boasting of the enormity of his collection. others  such as lucullus  took on the role of lending librarian by sharing scrolls in their collection. many roman emperors included public libraries into their political propaganda to win favor from citizens. while scholars were employed in librarian roles in the various emperors  libraries  there was no specific office or role that qualified an individual to be a librarian. for example  pompeius macer  the first librarian of augustus  library  was a praetor  an office that combined both military and judicial duties. a later librarian of the same library was gaius julius hyginus  a grammarian.   === middle ages and renaissance ===  christian monasteries in europe are credited with keeping the institution of libraries alive after the fall of the roman empire. it is during this time that the first codex (book as opposed to scroll) enters popularity  the parchment codex. within the monasteries  the role of librarian was often filled by an overseer of the scriptorium where monks would copy out books cover to cover. a monk named anastasias  who took on the title of bibliothecarius (literally  librarian ) following his successful translations of the greek classicists. during this period  the lectern system  in which books were chained to desks for security  was also introduced. classification and organization of books during this period was generally done by subject and alphabetically  with materials inventoried using basic check lists. later in the period  individuals known as librarius began more formal cataloguing  inventory  and classification.in the 14th century  universities began to reemerge which had libraries and employed librarians. at the same time royalty  nobles and jurists began to establish libraries of their own as status symbols. king charles v of france began his own library  and he kept his collection as a bibliophile  an attribute that is closely connected to librarians of this time.the renaissance is considered to be a time of aristocratic enthusiasm for libraries. during this period  great private libraries were developed in europe by figures such as petrarch and boccaccio. these libraries were sponsored by popes  royals  and nobility who sent agents throughout western europe to locate manuscripts in deteriorating monastic libraries. as a result  renaissance libraries were filled with a wealth of texts. while materials in these libraries were mostly restricted  the libraries were open to the public. librarians were needed to plan and organize libraries to meet public needs. a tool to achieve these organizational goals  the first library catalog  appeared in 1595.   === enlightenment era ===  during the 16th century  the idea of creating a bibliotheca universalis  a universal listing of all printed books  emerged from well-established academics and librarians  conrad gessner  gabriel naudé  john
dury  and gottfried leibniz. the four librarians responsible for establishing the bibliotheca universalis are important figures in librarianship. gabriel naude published avis pour dresser une bibliothèque  the first printed monograph on librarianship. in this monograph  naude advocated collecting all kinds of books  old and new  of famous  more obscure  and heretical authors. he also contributed to the idea of organization and administration of libraries which led to the development of library collections. it was also in part thanks to naude that some libraries began to lend books outside of the precincts of the library.john dury is considered to be the first english library theorist. he wrote two letters to samuel hartlib concerning the duties of a professional librarian  which were published in 1650 as  the reformed librarie-keeper . he held that librarians should not only care for the books  but should also be well educated and accomplished to raise the standards of librarianship. furthermore  he advocated that librarians deserve a living wage in order to use their energy to perform their duties to the fullest extent. gottfried leibniz upheld that the librarian was the most important factor in the aid of learning. he is credited as including science texts in addition to conventional literature within library collections.another key figure of this time was sir thomas bodley  who gave up his career as a diplomat and established oxford s bodleian library. he is credited as creating the first functional library of modern times. subsequent librarians following bodley were called protobibliothecarius bodleianus  bodley s librarian. they would earn £40 a year. the ideas formed with these librarians continued to develop into the 17th century. with the approach of bibliotheca universalis  libraries changed  the content of libraries became less selective  to include literature of entertainment as well as academic value. at this time  libraries also became fully open to the public  with access no longer restricted to a small circle of readers. in 18th-century france  two librarians  hubert-pascal ameilhon and joseph van praet  selected and identified over 300 000 books and manuscripts that became the property of the people in the bibliothèque nationale. during the french revolution  librarians assumed sole responsibility for selecting books for use by all citizen of the nation. out of this action came the implementation of the concept of modern library service  the democratic extension of library services to the general public  regardless of wealth or education.   === modern era === while there were full-time librarians in the 18th century  the professionalization of the library role was a 19th-century development  as shown by its first training school  its first university school  and its first professional associations and licensing procedures.  in england in the 1870s  a new employment role opened for women in libraries  it was said that the tasks were  eminently suited to girls and women.   by 1920  women and men were equally numerous
in the library profession  but women pulled ahead by 1930 and comprised 80% by 1960.  the factors accounting for the transition included the demographic losses of the first world war   the provisions of the public libraries act of 1919  the library-building activity of the carnegie united kingdom trust  and the library employment advocacy of the central bureau for the employment of women. in the united kingdom  evidence suggests that the conservative government began replacing professional librarians with unpaid volunteers in 2015–2016.   == roles and responsibilities ==   === positions and duties === specific duties vary depending on the size and type of library. olivia crosby described librarians as  information experts in the information age . most librarians spend their time working in one of the following areas of a library  archivists can be specialized librarians who deal with archival materials  such as manuscripts  documents and records  though this varies from country to country  and there are other routes to the archival profession. collection development or acquisitions librarians monitor the selection of books and electronic resources. large libraries often use approval plans  which involve the librarian for a specific subject creating a profile that allows publishers to send relevant books to the library without any additional vetting. librarians can then see those books when they arrive and decide if they will become part of the collection or not. all collections librarians also have a certain amount of funding to allow them to purchase books and materials that don t arrive via approval. electronic resources librarians manage the databases that libraries license from third-party vendors. school librarians work in school libraries and perform duties as teachers  information technology specialists  and advocates for literacy. instruction librarians teach information literacy skills in face-to-face classes or through the creation of online learning objects. they instruct library users on how to find  evaluate  and use information effectively. they are most common in academic libraries. media specialists teach students to find and analyze information  purchase books and other resources for the school library  supervise library assistants  and are responsible for all aspects of running the library/media center. both library media teachers (lmts) and young adult public librarians order books and other materials that will interest their young adult patrons. they also must help yas find relevant and authoritative internet resources. helping this age group to become lifelong learners and readers is a main objective of professionals in this library specialty. outreach librarians are charged with providing library and information services for underrepresented groups  such as people with disabilities  low income neighborhoods  home bound adults and seniors  incarcerated and ex-offenders  and homeless and rural communities. in academic libraries  outreach librarians might focus on high school students  transfer students  first-generation college students  and minorities. public service librarians work with the public  frequently at the reference desk of lending libraries.  some specialize in serving adults or children.
children s librarians provide appropriate material for children at all age levels  include pre-readers  conduct specialized programs and work with the children (and often their parents)  to help foster interest and competence in the young reader. (in larger libraries  some specialize in teen services  periodicals  or other special collections.) reference or research librarians help people doing research to find the information they need  through a structured conversation called a reference interview.  the help may take the form of research on a specific question  providing direction on the use of databases and other electronic information resources  obtaining specialized materials from other sources  or providing access to and care of delicate or expensive materials.  these services are sometimes provided by other library staff that have been given a certain amount of special training  some have criticized this trend.systems librarians develop  troubleshoot and maintain library systems  including the library catalog and related systems. technical service librarians work  behind the scenes  ordering library materials and database subscriptions  computers and other equipment  and supervise the cataloging and physical processing of new materials. a youth services librarian  or children s librarian  is in charge of serving young patrons from infancy all the way to young adulthood. their duties vary  from planning summer reading programs to weekly story hour programs. they are multitaskers  as the children s section of a library may act as its own separate library within the same building. children s librarians must be knowledgeable of popular books for school-aged children and other library items  such as e-books and audiobooks. they are charged with the task of creating a safe and fun learning environment outside of school and the home. a young adult or ya librarian specifically serves patrons who are between 12 and 18 years old. young adults are those patrons that look to library services to give them direction and guidance toward recreation  education  and emancipation. a young adult librarian could work in several different institutions  one might be a school library/media teacher  a member of a public library team  or a librarian in a penal institution. licensing for library/media teacher includes a bachelor or master of arts in teaching and additional higher-level course work in library science. ya librarians who work in public libraries are expected to have a master s degree in library and information science (mlis)  relevant work experience  or a related credential.   === additional responsibilities === experienced librarians may take administrative positions such as library or information center director or learning resource officer.  similar to the management of any other organization  they are concerned with the long-term planning of the library  and its relationship with its parent organization (the city or county for a public library  the college/university for an academic library  or the organization served by a special library).  in smaller or specialized libraries  librarians typically perform a wide
range of the different duties.  representative examples of librarian responsibilities   researching topics of interest for their constituencies. referring patrons to other community organizations and government offices. suggesting appropriate books ( readers  advisory ) for children of different reading levels  and recommending novels for recreational reading. reviewing books and journal databases working with other education organisations to establish continual lifelong learning and further education initiatives facilitating and promoting reading clubs. developing programs for library users of all ages and backgrounds. managing access to electronic information resources. assessing library services and collections in order to best meet library users needs. building and maintains collections to respond to changing community needs or demands creating pathfinders writing grants to gain funding for expanded program or collections digitizing collections for online access publishing articles in library science journals answering incoming reference questions via telephone  postal mail  email  fax  and chat delivering arts and cultural activities to local communities initiating and establishing  creative digital activities to introduce children to coding  engineering and website building marking promotion and advocacy of library services assisting job seekers and local businesses making and enforcing computer appointments on the public access internet computers.   == workplaces ==  basic categories of workplace settings for librarians are routinely classified around the world as  public  academic  school  and special.  some librarians will start and operate their own business.  they often call themselves information brokers  research specialists  knowledge management  competitive intelligence  or independent information professionals.  below are the basic differences between the types of libraries.   === public library === public libraries are created through legislation within the jurisdiction they serve. accordingly  they are given certain benefits  such as taxpayer funding  but must adhere to service standards and meet a wide group of client needs. they are usually overseen by a board of directors or library commission from the community. mission statements  service and collection policies are the fundamental administrative features of public libraries. occasionally  private lending libraries serve the public in the manner of public libraries.  in the united states  public librarians and public libraries are represented by the public library association.  public library staffing is structured in response to community needs. libraries bridge traditional divisions between technical and public services positions by adopting new technologies such as mobile library services and reconfigure organizations depending on the local situation.   === academic library === an academic library is a library that is an integral part of a college  university  or other institution of postsecondary education  administered to meet the information  and research needs of its students  faculty  and staff. in the united states  the professional association for academic libraries and librarians is the association of college and research libraries. depending upon the institution  the library may serve a particular faculty or the entire institution. many different types  sizes  and collections are found
in academic libraries and some academic librarians are specialists in these collections and archives. a university librarian  or chief librarian  is responsible for the library within the college structure  and may also be called the dean of libraries or director of libraries. some post-secondary institutions treat librarians as faculty  and they may be called professor or other academic ranks  which may or may not increase their salary and benefits.  some universities make similar demands of academic librarians for research and professional service as are required of faculty. academic librarians administer various levels of service and privilege to faculty  students  alumni  and the public.   === school library === a school library exclusively serve the needs of a public or private school. the primary purpose is to support the students  teachers  and curriculum of the school or school district. in addition to library administration  certificated teacher-librarians instruct individual students  groups and classes  and faculty in effective research methods  often referred to as information literacy skills. audio-visual equipment service and/or textbook circulation may also be included in a school librarian s responsibilities. often  teacher-librarians are qualified teachers who take academic courses for school library certification or earn a master s degree in library science.   === special library === special libraries can be describe as libraries designed to perform some specific function to a particular set of people or an organization i.e some  l include news  law  medical  theological  government  nongovernmental organization  prison  corporate  museum  or any other type of library owned and operated by an organization.  they can be highly specialized  serving a discrete user group with a restricted collection area.  in an increasingly global and virtual workplace  many special librarians may not even work in a library at all but instead manage and facilitate the use of electronic collections. funding for special libraries varies widely.  librarians in some types of special libraries may be required to have additional training  such as a law degree for a librarian in an academic law library or appropriate subject degrees for subject specialties such as chemistry  engineering  etc. many belong to the special libraries association.  there are also more specific associations such as the american association of law libraries  art libraries society of north america   the american theological library association  the medical library association  or the visual resources association.   == education == librarians generally hold a university degree in library science. it is also possible to earn a doctorate in library science. the first doctoral degree in library science was offered by the graduate library school  university of chicago  1928-1989. graduates with phds usually become teaching faculty in schools of library and information science  or sometimes occupy the directorship or deanship of university libraries.  those undertaking research at the doctoral level can pursue a very wide range of
interests including information technology  government information policy  social research into information use among particular segments of society  information in organizations and corporate settings  and the history of books and printing. it is common in academic and other research libraries to require the librarians to obtain master s degrees in some academic subject  sometimes but not necessarily related to their professional responsibilities  in major research libraries  some of the librarians will hold ph. d degrees in subject fields. other advanced degrees often taken in conjunction with a degree in librarianship are law  management  health administration  or public administration. library technicians  library assistants  and library associates (not to be confused with academic rank of assistant librarian or associate librarian) may have diplomas but usually do not hold library-related degrees. occasionally they also hold undergraduate or graduate degrees in other disciplines. these workers  sometimes referred to as para-professionals  perform duties such as database management  library cataloging  ready reference  and serials and monograph processing.   === australia ===  in australia  a professional librarian must meet the requirements set out by the australian library and information association (alia). there are three ways in which these requirements can be met  the individual must obtain an alia-recognized bachelor s degree in library and information studies  complete a first degree in any discipline followed by an alia-recognized postgraduate diploma or masters course  or gain an alia-recognized library technician qualifications (undertaken at a technical and further education (tafe) college/institute followed by an alia-recognized bachelor s degree in library and information studies. alia is responsible for accreditation of library specific qualifications for both librarians and library technicians. professional australian teacher-librarians require slightly different qualifications. in addition to having a degree that meets alia s accreditation process  teacher librarians must also hold recognized teaching qualifications.   === canada and usa ===  in the united states and canada  a librarian generally has a one or two-year (more common) master s degree in library science (called an mi  mls  malis  msls  mis  msis  ms-lis  mist  mlis  or mils) from an accredited university. these degrees are accredited by the american library association and can have specializations within fields such as archival studies  records management  information architecture  public librarianship  medical librarianship  law librarianship  special librarianship  academic librarianship  or school (k-12) librarianship. school librarians often are required to have a teaching credential  however  an additional library science degree is not generally required. many  if not most  academic librarians also have a second  subject-based master s degree. this is especially true of four-year colleges. beta phi mu  the international honor society for library & information science and information technology  honors faculty  for distinguished service to education for librarianship with the annual beta phi mu award.   === europe === in the united kingdom and some other
countries  a librarian can have a three- or four-year bachelor s degree in library science  separate master s degrees in librarianship  archive management  and records management are also available. in the united kingdom  these degrees are accredited by the chartered institute of library and information professionals and the society of archivists.  in germany and some other countries  the first step for an academic librarian is a phd in a subject field  followed by additional training in librarianship.   == technology == the increasing role of technology in libraries has a significant impact on the changing roles of librarians. new technologies are dramatically increasing the accessibility of information  and librarians are adapting to the evolving needs of users that emerge from the adoption of these new technologies. digital librarians have become ubiquitous in the information age  so much so that a new word has been coined for such digital curators   cybrarian  which is a portmanteau of the prefix  cyber-  (used to denote digital technology) and  librarian . the term  cybrarian  can be applied to someone who concerns themselves primarily with the role that technology plays in a traditional library setting.one of the most significant examples of how technology has changed the role of librarians in the last 50 years has been the move from traditional card catalogs to online public access catalogs (opacs).   librarians had to develop software and the marc standards for cataloguing records electronically. they had to purchase and run the computers necessary to use the software. they had to teach the public how to use the new technologies and move to more virtual working environments. the same could be said of other technology developments  from electronic databases (including the internet)  to logistical functions such as bar codes (or in the near future rfid). many librarians provide virtual reference services (via web-based chat  instant messaging  text messaging  and e-mail)  work in digitizing initiatives for works in the public domain  teach information literacy and technology classes to their users  and work on the development of information architectures for improving access and search functionality. these examples illustrate some of the ways in which librarians are using technology to fulfill and expand upon their historical roles. librarians must continually adapt to new formats for information  such as electronic journals and e-books  which present both challenges and opportunities in providing access and promoting them to library patrons.increasing technological advance has presented the possibility of automating some aspects of traditional libraries. in 2004 a group of researchers in spain developed the uji online robot. this robot is able to navigate the library  look for the specified book  and upon its discovery  carefully take it from the shelf and deliver it to the user.   because of the robot s extremely limited function  its introduction into libraries poses little risk of the employment of librarians  whose duties are not defined
by menial tasks such as the retrieval of books. recently over 100 libraries in the united states have begun adding 3d printers to their collections in an effort to expose the public to cutting edge technology.   == professional organizations ==   === united states === the two largest library associations in the united states are the american library association (ala) and the special libraries association.  yalsa the young adult library services association serves young adult librarians  and is part of the american library association. many u.s. states have their own library association as well.  librarians may also join such organizations as the association of college and research libraries and the public library association and the art libraries society. the canadian library association serves canada and there are provincial associations as well  such as the ontario library association.  in the united kingdom  the professional body for librarians is the chartered institute of library and information professionals (formerly known as the library association). the international federation of library associations and institutions (ifla) represents the interests of libraries and librarians internationally. (see also the list of library associations.) ifla hosts the annual ifla world library and information congress. recent issues of concern for u.s. libraries include implementation of the patriot act and the children s internet protection act. many  librarians around the world share american librarians  concern over ethical issues surrounding censorship and privacy. some librarians join activist organizations like the uk-based information for social change and the north american-based progressive librarians guild. the progressive librarians guild covers the actions of union library workers in its journal and blog  union library workers.within the american library association (ala)  some also join the social responsibilities round table (srrt). srrt came into being amid the social ferment of the 1960s and is often critical of the american library association for not living up to its professed ideals. another important activist organization is the social responsibilities special interest section of the american association of law libraries (aall). these activist organizations are viewed as controversial by some librarians  while others view them as a natural extension and outgrowth of their own deeply held library ethics. librarians in the united states who as political actors in our times provide examples of a commitment to equality  the right to know or social justice include peter chase  george christian  janet nocek  and barbara bailey. in the doe v. gonzales case  these librarians challenged the constitutionality of the nondisclosure provisions of the national security letters issued by the government under the usa patriot act in terrorist or other investigations. the four received the roger baldwin medal of liberty from the american civil liberties union in june 2007.   == controversies in librarianship ==   === the deaf community and librarianship === deaf people at the library have the same needs as every other person visiting the library and often have more difficulty accessing materials and services. australian librarian karen mcquigg states that “even
ten years ago  when i was involved in a project looking at what public libraries could offer the deaf  it seemed as if the gap between the requirements of this group and what public libraries could offer was too great for public libraries to be able to serve them effectively.”   ==== united states ==== the history of the role of libraries in the deaf community in the united states is a sordid one at best. the american library association readily admits that disabled people belong to a minority that is often overlooked and underrepresented by people in the library  and the deaf community belongs in this minority group. however  in the last few decades  libraries across the united states have made great strides in the mission of making libraries more accessible to disabilities in general and to the deaf community specifically. one of the first activists in the library community working toward accessibility for the deaf was alice hagemeyer. when disabled communities began demanding equality in the 1970s  hagemeyer decided to go back to school for her master s degree in library science. while she was studying there  she realized that there was not very much information about the deaf community at her library or at the libraries of any of her classmates. she soon became an activist for deaf awareness at her library  and she became the first “librarian for the deaf community” from any public library in the nation. hagemeyer also constructed a manual of resources for deaf people and those associated with them called the red notebook  which is now online at the website of the friends of libraries for deaf action. hagemeyer was one of the first library activists to make strides for the deaf community.new guidelines from library organizations such as international federation of library associations and institutions (ifla) and the ala were written in order to help libraries make their information more accessible to people with disabilities  and in some cases  specifically the deaf community. ifla’s guidelines for library services to deaf people is one such set of guidelines  and it was published to inform libraries of the services that should be provided for deaf patrons. most of the guidelines pertain to ensuring that deaf patrons have equal access to all available library services. other guidelines include training library staff to provide services for the deaf community  availability of text telephones or ttys not only to assist patrons with reference questions but also for making outside calls  using the most recent technology in order to communicate more effectively with deaf patrons  including closed captioning services for any television services  and developing a collection that would interest the members of the deaf community.over the years  library services have begun to evolve in order to accommodate the needs and desires of local deaf communities. at the queen borough public library (qbpl) in new york  the staff implemented new and innovative ideas in order to involve the community and
library staff with the deaf people in their community. the qbpl hired a deaf librarian  lori stambler  to train the library staff about deaf culture  to teach sign language classes for family members and people who are involved with deaf people  and to teach literacy classes for deaf patrons. in working with the library  stambler was able to help the community reach out to its deaf neighbors  and helped other deaf people become more active in their outside community.   ==== deaf libraries ==== the library at gallaudet university  the only deaf liberal arts university in the united states  was founded in 1876. the library’s collection has grown from a small number of reference books to the world’s largest collection of deaf-related materials with over 234 000 books and thousands of other materials in different formats. the collection is so large that the library had to create a hybrid classification system based on the dewey decimal classification system in order to make cataloging and location within the library much easier for both library staff and users. the library also houses the university’s archives  which holds some of the oldest deaf-related books and documents in the world.in nashville  tennessee  sandy cohen manages the library services for the deaf and hard of hearing (lsdhh). the program was created in 1979 in response to information accessibility issues for the deaf in the nashville area. originally  the only service provided was the news via a teletypewriter or tty  but today  the program has expanded to serving the entire state of tennessee by providing all different types of information and material on deafness  deaf culture  and information for family members of deaf people  as well as a historical and reference collection.   === gender and librarianship ===   ==== united states ==== librarianship manifests a dual career structure for men and women in the united states. in 2015  83 percent of librarians were women. in spite of women making up most of the work force  in 2014  women working as full-time librarians reported a median annual salary of $48 589  compared to $52 528 for men.  top positions are more often held by men  for example  the position of librarian of congress has been held  mostly  by men since the establishment of the library of congress. women  however  have made continuous progress toward equality. women have also been largely left out of standard histories of u.s. librarianship  but suzanne hildenbrand s scholarly assessment of the work done by women has expanded the historical record.in 1911  theresa elmendorf became the first woman elected president of the american library association (which was founded in 1876)  she was also the first woman ever to be nominated for this position. she was ala president from may 24  1911  until july 2  1912.on july 13  2016  carla hayden became the first female 
and the first african american  to become librarian of congress. dr. hayden was nominated by president barack obama in february 2016 as the 14th librarian of congress.the american library association s social responsibilities round table feminist task force (ftf) was founded in 1970 by women who wished to address sexism in libraries and librarianship. ftf was the first ala group to focus on women s issues.the committee on the status of women in librarianship (coswl) of the american library association  founded in 1976  represents the diversity of women s interest within ala and ensures that the association considers the rights of the majority (women) in the library field  and promotes and initiates the collection  analysis  dissemination  and coordination of information on the status of women in librarianship. the bibliographic history of women in u.s. librarianship and women librarians developing services for women has been well-documented in the series of publications initially issued by the social responsibilities round table task force on women and later continued by coswl.the reference and adult services division of the ala has a discussion group titled  women s materials and women library users  formed in the mid-1980s.the library leadership and management association division of the ala has a discussion group titled  llama women administrators discussion group  which exists to provide a forum for discussion of problems of particular concern to women in administrative positions.the ala also has the women & gender studies section (wgss) of its division  association of college & research libraries  this section was formed to discuss  promote  and support women s studies collections and services in academic and research libraries.the ala policy manual states under b.2.1.15 access to library resources and services regardless of sex  gender identity  gender expression  or sexual orientation (old number 53.1.15)   the american library association stringently and unequivocally maintains that libraries and librarians have an obligation to resist efforts that systematically exclude materials dealing with any subject matter  including sex  gender identity or expression  or sexual orientation. the association also encourages librarians to proactively support the first amendment rights of all library users  regardless of sex  sexual orientation  or gender identity or expression. adopted 1993  amended 2000  2004  2008  2010.  it also states under b.2.12  threats to library materials related to sex  gender identity  or sexual orientation (old number 53.12)   the american library association supports the inclusion in library collections of materials that reflect the diversity of our society  including those related to sex  sexual orientation  and gender identity or expression. ala encourages all american library association chapters to take active stands against all legislative or other government attempts to proscribe materials related to sex  sexual orientation  and gender identity or expression  and encourages all libraries to acquire and make available materials representative of all the people in our society. adopted 2005  amended 2009  2010.  see
also  role of women in librarianship  1876–1976  the advancement and struggle for equalization  by kathleen weibel (author  editor)  kathleen de la pena mccook (editor)  and dianne j. ellsworth (editor)  published 1978.   == popular culture ==  stereotypes of librarians in popular culture are frequently negative  librarians are portrayed as puritanical  punitive  unattractive  and timid if female  or timid  unattractive  and effeminate if male.   == see also == archivist bookstore curator history of public library advocacy library bill of rights librarians in north america librarianship and human rights libraries and the lgbt community library school library technician library associate list of librarians periodicals librarian public library advocacy   == references ==   == external links == alia  careers in library and information management friends of libraries usa occupational outlook handbook  librarians sla s competencies for information professionals library and information science wiki some old egyptian librarians  ernest gushing richardson  charles scribners  1911
a broker is a person or firm who arranges transactions between a buyer and a seller for a commission when the deal is executed. a broker who also acts as a seller or as a buyer becomes a principal party to the deal. neither role should be confused with that of an agent—one who acts on behalf of a principal party in a deal.   == definition == a broker is an independent party  whose services are used extensively in some industries. a broker s prime responsibility is to bring sellers and buyers together and thus a broker is the third-person facilitator between a buyer and a seller. an example would be a real estate or  stock broker who facilitates the sale of a property.brokers can furnish market research and market data. brokers may represent either the seller or the buyer but generally not both at the same time. brokers are almost always necessary for the purchase and sale of financial instruments. brokers are expected to have the tools and resources to reach the largest possible base of buyers and sellers. they then screen these potential buyers or sellers for the perfect match. an individual producer  on the other hand  especially one new in the market  probably will not have the same access to customers as a broker. another benefit of using a broker is cost—they might be cheaper in smaller markets  with smaller accounts  or with a limited line of products.some types of brokers  such as real estate brokers  often have strict state requirements for using the term  while others  such as aircraft brokers  typically have no formal licensing or training requirements.some brokers  known as discount brokers  charge smaller commission  sometimes in exchange for offering less advice or services than full service brokerage firms.a broker-dealer is a broker that transacts for its own account  in addition to facilitating transactions for clients.brokerage firms are generally subject to regulations based on the type of brokerage and jurisdictions in which they operate. examples of brokerage firm regulatory agencies include the u.s. securities and exchange commission and the financial industry regulatory authority (finra)  which regulate stockbrokers in the united states.   == etymology == the word  broker  derives from old french broceur  small trader  of uncertain origin  but possibly from old french brocheor meaning  wine retailer  which comes from the verb brochier  or   to broach (a keg) .   == types of brokers ==   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to brokers at wikimedia commons
an accountant is a practitioner of accounting or accountancy  which is the measurement  disclosure or provision of assurance about financial information that helps managers  investors  tax authorities and others make decisions about allocating resource(s). accountants who have demonstrated competency through their professional associations  certification exams are certified to use titles such as chartered accountant  chartered certified accountant or certified public accountant. such professionals are granted certain responsibilities by statute  such as the ability to certify an organization s financial statements  and may be held liable for professional misconduct. non-qualified accountants may be employed by a qualified accountant  or may work independently without statutory privileges and obligations. cahan & sun (2015) used archival study to find out that accountants’ personal characteristics may exert a very significant impact during the audit process and further influence audit fees and audit quality. the big four auditors are the largest employers of accountants worldwide. however  most accountants are employed in commerce  industry  and the public sector.   == commonwealth of nations ==  in the commonwealth of nations  which include the united kingdom  canada  australia  new zealand  hong kong pre-1997  and several other states  commonly recognised accounting qualifications are chartered certified accountant (acca)  chartered accountant (ca or aca)  chartered management accountant (acma) and international accountant (aaia). other qualifications in particular countries include certified public accountant (cpa – ireland and cpa – hong kong)  chartered professional accountant (cpa – canada)  certified management accountant (cma – australia) (cma – sri lanka)  certified practising accountant (cpa – australia) and members of the institute of public accountants (australia)  and certified public practising accountant (cppa – new zealand). the institute of chartered accountants of scotland (icas) received its royal charter in 1854 and is the world s first professional body of accountants.   === united kingdom and ireland ===  a chartered accountant must be a member of one of the following  the institute of chartered accountants in england and wales (icaew) (designatory letters aca or fca) the institute of chartered accountants of scotland (icas) (designatory letters ca) chartered accountants ireland (cai) a recognised equivalent body from another commonwealth country (designatory letters being ca (name of country) e.g. ca (australia)) a chartered certified accountant must be a member of the association of chartered certified accountants (designatory letters acca or fcca). a chartered management accountant must be a member of the chartered institute of management accountants (designatory letters acma or fcma). a chartered public finance accountant must be a member of the chartered institute of public finance and accountancy (designatory letters cpfa). an international accountant is a member of the association of international accountants (designatory letters aaia or faia). an incorporated financial accountant is a member of the institute of financial accountants (designatory letters afa or ffa). a certified public accountant may be a member of the american institute of certified public accountants (designatory letters aicpa) or its equivalent in another country  and is
usually designated as such after passing the uniform certified public accountant examination. a public accountant may be a member of the institute of public accountants (designatory letters aipa  mipa or fipa). registered qualified accountant may be a member of accountants institute (designatory letters rqa  and fqa for fellow members)  based in sloveniaexcepting the association of certified public accountants  each of the above bodies admits members only after passing examinations and undergoing a period of relevant work experience. once admitted  members are expected to comply with ethical guidelines and gain appropriate professional experience. chartered  chartered certified  chartered public finance  and international accountants engaging in practice (i.e. selling services to the public rather than acting as an employee) must gain a  practising certificate  by meeting further requirements such as purchasing adequate insurance and undergoing inspections. the icaew  icas  icai  acca and aapa are five recognised supervisory bodies (rsb) in the uk. a member of one of them may also become a statutory auditor in accordance with the companies act  providing they can demonstrate the necessary professional ability in that area and submit to regular inspection. it is illegal for any individual or firm that is not a statutory auditor to perform a company audit.the icaew  icas  icai  acca  aia and cipfa are six recognised qualifying bodies statutory (rqb) in the uk. a member of one of them may also become a statutory auditor in accordance with the companies act  providing they are a member of one of the five recognised supervisory bodies rsb mentioned above. all six rqbs are listed under eu mutual recognition directives to practise in 27 eu member states and individually entered into agreement with the hong kong institute of certified public accountants (hkicpa). further restrictions apply to accountants who carry out insolvency work. in addition to the bodies above  technical qualifications are offered by the association of accounting technicians  acca and aia  which are respectively called aat technician  cat (certified accounting technician) and iat (international accounting technician).   === australia === in australia  there are three legally recognised local professional accounting bodies which all enjoy the same recognition and can be considered as  qualified accountant  the institute of public accountants (ipa)  cpa australia (cpa) and the chartered accountants australia and new zealand (caanz). other international bodies such as acca (the association of chartered certified accountants) and institute of chartered accountants in england and wales (icaew) enjoy recognition for the purposes of supporting their members in their careers. for instance  acca has achieved recognition by the tax practitioner board  as tax and bas agents  in 2010.   === bangladesh ===  chartered accountancy is governed in bangladesh by the institute of chartered accountants of bangladesh (icab). and the institute of cost and management accountants of bangladesh (icmab) offers management accountant studies in bangladesh.   === canada === in canada  a chartered professional accountant (cpa) must be a
member of the chartered professional accountants of canada (designatory letters cpa). up to 2013  there were three nationally recognized accounting designations in canada  chartered accountant (ca)  certified general accountant (cga)  and certified management accountants (cma). the national ca and cga bodies were created by acts of parliament in 1902 and 1913 respectively  the national cma organization was established under the canada corporations act in 1920. in january 2012  following eight months of member and stakeholder consultation  the canadian institute of chartered accountants (cica)  the society of management accountants of canada (cma canada) and certified general accountants of canada (cga-canada) issued a framework for uniting the canadian accounting profession under a new canadian chartered professional accountant (cpa) designation. chartered professional accountants of canada (cpa canada) was established by cica and cma canada on january 1  2013  under the canada not-for-profit corporations act  to support canadian provincial accounting bodies that were unifying under the cpa banner. cga-canada integrated with cpa canada on october 1  2014  completing the unification of canada s accounting profession at the national level. all recognized national and provincial accounting bodies in canada have now unified under the cpa banner. the canadian cpa designation is held by more than 200 000 members in canada and around the world.   === india === chartered accountancy is offered in india by the institute of chartered accountants of india (icai)  the second largest accounting body in the world. this institute was established in 1949 under the chartered accountants act  1949 for the regulation of the profession of chartered accountants in india. the icai set up the accountancy museum of india in 2009  the third museum of accounting in the world. it is located at icai s office in noida.   === indonesia === under public accountants law ( uu 5/2011)  the institute of certified public accountants of indonesia (iapi) is the professional organization having the authority to issue cpa designation which is the statutory requirements for obtaining public accountant license from the government.   === pakistan === the institute of chartered accountants of pakistan (icap) offers chartered accountant studies in pakistan. icap was established under the chartered accountants ordinance  1961 as a self-regulatory body. the institute of cost and management accountants of pakistan (icmap) offers accountant studies in pakistan. icmap was established under the cost and management accountants act  1966. pakistan institute of public finance accountants (pipfa) is an autonomous body recognized mainly in the government sector and established under license from the securities and exchange commission of pakistan by the authority given under section 42 of the companies ordinance  1984. the body is co-sponsored by the institute of chartered accountants of pakistan  the institute of cost and management accountants of pakistan and the auditor general of pakistan. pipfa has more than 5 000 members and a number of them are members of icap and icmap. the institute was established to produce a second tier of accounting professionals in pakistan
  === new zealand === in new zealand  there are two local accountancy bodies the chartered accountants australia and new zealand (caanz) and the new zealand association of certified public accountants (nzacpa) the operating name of new zealand association of accountants inc (nzaa). to audit public companies an individual must be a member of either the caanz or an otherwise gazetted body. chartered certified accountant (association of chartered certified accountants or fcca) qualification has also been gazetted under. an acca member can practice as long as they hold an acca public practice certificate (with audit qualification) in their country of origin.   === singapore === in singapore  a public accountant must be a member of any professional accountancy body in singapore. institute of singapore chartered accountants (isca) is the sole local accountancy body  therefore the public accountant must be a member of the isca.   === sri lanka === in sri lanka  a chartered accountant must be a member of the institute of chartered accountants of sri lanka (designatory letters aca or fca). it is the sole local accountancy body  therefore to audit public companies an individual must be a member of the icasl. a certified management account also must be a member of the institute of management accountants of sri lanka (designatory letters acma or fcma).   == austria == in austria  the accountancy profession is regulated by the bilanzbuchhaltungsgesetz 2006 (bibug – management accountancy law).   == hong kong ==  in hong kong  the accountancy industry is regulated by hong kong institute of certified public accountants hkicpa under the professional accountants ordinance (chapter 50  laws of hong kong). the auditing industry for limited companies is regulated under the companies ordinance (chapter 32  laws of hong kong)  and other ordinances such as the securities and futures ordinance  the listing rules  etc. hkicpa terminated all recognition of oversea bodies in 2005 for accreditation under professional accountants ordinance. in general  all british rqbs except for cipfa were re-accredited. please refer to hkicpa for latest recognition.   == portugal == in portugal  there are two accountancy qualifications  the técnicos oficiais de contas (toc)  responsible for producing accounting and tax information  and the revisor oficial de contas (roc)  more related to auditing practices. the toc certification is exclusively awarded by the professional organization ordem dos técnicos oficiais de contas (otoc)  and the certification to become an auditor is awarded by another professional organization  the ordem dos revisores oficiais de contas (oroc). in general  accountants or auditors accredited by otoc or oroc are individuals with university graduation diplomas in business management  economics  mathematics or law who  after further studies  applied for an exam and received the certification to be a toc or roc. that certification is only received after a one-year (toc) or three-year (roc) internship. any citizen having a polytechnic degree as a bookkeeper is also entitled to apply for the exam and
certification at the otoc.   == united states ==  in the united states  licensed accountants are certified public accountants (cpas)  and in certain states  public accountants (pas). unlicensed accountants may be certified internal auditors (cias) and certified management accountants (cmas). the difference between these certifications is primarily the legal status and the types of services provided  although individuals may earn more than one certification. additionally  much accounting work is performed by uncertified individuals  who may be working under the supervision of a certified accountant. as noted above  the majority of accountants work in the private sector or may offer their services without the need for certification. the training time required for accountancy certification in the us requires specific guidelines   certificate  several months to a year associate degree  1–2 years bachelor s degree  3–4 years cpa  5 years of education (150 semester college credits) plus 1–2 years of work experience (length of work experience requirement depends on which state is granting the license) master s degree  1–2 years doctoral degree  3–5 yearsa cpa is licensed by a state to provide auditing services to the public. many cpa firms also offer accounting  tax  litigation support  and other financial advisory services. the requirements for receiving the cpa license vary from state to state  although the passage of the uniform certified public accountant examination is required by all states. this examination is designed and graded by the american institute of certified public accountants (aicpa). a pa (sometimes referred to as lpa—licensed public accountant) is licensed by the state to practice accountancy to the same extent as are cpas  although in some states pas are not permitted to perform audits or reviews (notably iowa  minnesota  oregon  & south carolina). a pa s ability to practice out of state is very limited due to most states having phased out the pa designation. while most states no longer accept new pa license applicants  four states still accept pa applicants for practice privileges within the state. as with the cpa  the requirements for receiving the pa license vary from state to state. most states require a passage of either two or three (out of four) sections of the cpa exam or passage of the comprehensive examination for accreditation in accounting which is administered and graded by the accreditation council for accountancy and taxation (acat). a certified internal auditor (cia) is granted a certificate from the institute of internal auditors (iia)  provided that the candidate has passed a four-part examination. one of the four parts is waived if the candidate has already passed the cpa exam. a cia typically provides services directly to an employer rather than to the public. a person holding the certificate in management accounting (cma) is granted the certificate by the institute of management accountants (ima)  provided that the candidate has passed an examination of two parts and has met the practical experience requirement of the ima. a
cma provides services directly to employers rather than to the public. a cma can also provide services to the public  but to an extent much lesser than that of a cpa. an enrolled agent (ea) is a federally authorized tax practitioner empowered by the u.s. department of the treasury to represent taxpayers before the internal revenue service (irs). enrolled agent status is the highest credential awarded by the irs  unlimited rights of representation. the ea credential is recognized across all 50 u.s. states. candidates must pass a three-part exam (called the special enrollment examination) covering the subjects of individual tax  business tax  and client representation  or must have worked at the irs for five consecutive years in a position which regularly engaged in these areas. the united states department of labor s bureau of labor statistics estimates that there are about one million persons employed as accountants and auditors in the u.s. u.s. tax laws grant cpas and eas a form of accountant–client privilege.   === non-certified accountants ===   == japan == in japan  a certified public accountant must be a member of the japanese institute of certified public accountants (jicpa). it is the sole professional accountancy organization in japan. the jicpa started as a voluntary organization in the 1500s and later became a corporation under the cpa act in the 1700s.   == see also == bookkeeper credit manager munshi   == references ==
bookkeeping is the recording of financial transactions  and is part of the process of accounting in business.  transactions include purchases  sales  receipts  and payments by an individual person or an organization/corporation. there are several standard methods of bookkeeping  including the single-entry and double-entry bookkeeping systems. while these may be viewed as  real  bookkeeping  any process for recording financial transactions is a bookkeeping process. bookkeeping is the work of a bookkeeper (or book-keeper)  who records the day-to-day financial transactions of a business. they usually write the daybooks (which contain records of sales  purchases  receipts  and payments)  and document each financial transaction  whether cash or credit  into the correct daybook—that is  petty cash book  suppliers ledger  customer ledger  etc.—and the general ledger. thereafter  an accountant can create financial reports from the information recorded by the bookkeeper. bookkeeping refers mainly to the record-keeping aspects of financial accounting  and involves preparing source documents for all transactions  operations  and other events of a business. the bookkeeper brings the books to the trial balance stage  an accountant may prepare the income statement and balance sheet using the trial balance and ledgers prepared by the bookkeeper.   == history == the origin of book-keeping is lost in obscurity  but recent researches indicate that methods of keeping accounts have existed from the remotest times of human life in cities. babylonian records written with styli on small slabs of clay have been found dating to 2600 bce.  the term  waste book  was used in colonial america  referring to the documenting of daily transactions of receipts and expenditures. records were made in chronological order  and for temporary use only. daily records were then transferred to a daybook or account ledger to balance the accounts and to create a permanent journal  then the waste book could be discarded  hence the name.   === process === the bookkeeping process primarily records the financial effects of transactions. an important difference between a manual and an electronic accounting system is the former s latency between the recording of a financial transaction and its posting in the relevant account. this delay  which is absent in electronic accounting systems due to nearly instantaneous posting to relevant accounts  is characteristic of manual systems  and gave rise to the primary books of accounts—cash book  purchase book  sales book  etc.—for immediately documenting a financial transaction. in the normal course of business  a document is produced each time a transaction occurs. sales and purchases usually have invoices or receipts. deposit slips are produced when lodgements (deposits) are made to a bank account. checks (spelled  cheques  in the uk and several other countries) are written to pay money out of the account. bookkeeping first involves recording the details of all of these source documents into multi-column journals (also known as books of first entry or daybooks). for example 
all credit sales are recorded in the sales journal  all cash payments are recorded in the cash payments journal. each column in a journal normally corresponds to an account. in the single entry system  each transaction is recorded only once. most individuals who balance their check-book each month are using such a system  and most personal-finance software follows this approach. after a certain period  typically a month  each column in each journal is totalled to give a summary for that period. using the rules of double-entry  these journal summaries are then transferred to their respective accounts in the ledger  or account book. for example  the entries in the sales journal are taken and a debit entry is made in each customer s account (showing that the customer now owes us money)  and a credit entry might be made in the account for  sale of class 2 widgets  (showing that this activity has generated revenue for us). this process of transferring summaries or individual transactions to the ledger is called  posting. once the posting process is complete  accounts kept using the  t  format undergo balancing  which is simply a process to arrive at the balance of the account. as a partial check that the posting process was done correctly  a working document called an unadjusted trial balance is created. in its simplest form  this is a three-column list. column one contains the names of those accounts in the ledger which have a non-zero balance. if an account has a debit balance  the balance amount is copied into column two (the debit column)  if an account has a credit balance  the amount is copied into column three (the credit column). the debit column is then totalled  and then the credit column is totalled. the two totals must agree—which is not by chance—because under the double-entry rules  whenever there is a posting  the debits of the posting equal the credits of the posting. if the two totals do not agree  an error has been made  either in the journals or during the posting process. the error must be located and rectified  and the totals of the debit column and the credit column recalculated to check for agreement before any further processing can take place. once the accounts balance  the accountant makes a number of adjustments and changes the balance amounts of some of the accounts. these adjustments must still obey the double-entry rule  for example  the inventory account and asset account might be changed to bring them into line with the actual numbers counted during a stocktake. at the same time  the expense account associated with usage of inventory is adjusted by an equal and opposite amount. other adjustments such as posting depreciation and prepayments are also done at this time. this results in a listing called the adjusted trial balance. it is the accounts in this list  and their corresponding debit or
credit balances  that are used to prepare the financial statements. finally financial statements are drawn from the trial balance  which may include   the income statement  also known as the statement of financial results  profit and loss account  or p&l the balance sheet  also known as the statement of financial position the cash flow statement the statement of changes in equity  also known as the statement of total recognised gains and losses   == entry systems ==   === single-entry system ===  the primary bookkeeping record in single-entry bookkeeping is the cash book  which is similar to a checking account register (in uk  cheque account  current account)  except all entries are allocated among several categories of income and expense accounts. separate account records are maintained for petty cash  accounts payable and receivable  and other relevant transactions such as inventory and travel expenses. to save time and avoid the errors of manual calculations  single-entry bookkeeping can be done today with do-it-yourself bookkeeping software.   === double-entry system ===  a double-entry bookkeeping system is a set of rules for recording financial information in a financial accounting system in which every transaction or event changes at least two different nominal ledger accounts.   == daybooks == a daybook is a descriptive and chronological (diary-like) record of day-to-day financial transactions  it is also called a book of original entry. the daybook s details must be transcribed formally into journals to enable posting to ledgers. daybooks include   sales daybook  for recording sales invoices. sales credits daybook  for recording sales credit notes. purchases daybook  for recording purchase invoices. purchases debits daybook  for recording purchase debit notes. cash daybook  usually known as the cash book  for recording all monies received and all monies paid out. it may be split into two daybooks  a receipts daybook documenting every money-amount received  and a payments daybook recording every payment made. general journal daybook  for recording journal entries.   == petty cash book == a petty cash book is a record of small-value purchases before they are later transferred to the ledger and final accounts  it is maintained by a petty or junior cashier. this type of cash book usually uses the imprest system  a certain amount of money is provided to the petty cashier by the senior cashier. this money is to cater for minor expenditures (hospitality  minor stationery  casual postage  and so on) and is reimbursed periodically on satisfactory explanation of how it was spent.   == journals == journals are recorded in the general journal daybook. a journal is a formal and chronological record of financial transactions before their values are accounted for in the general ledger as debits and credits. a company can maintain one journal for all transactions  or keep several journals based on similar activity (e.g.  sales  cash receipts  revenue  etc.) 
making transactions easier to summarize and reference later. for every debit journal entry recorded  there must be an equivalent credit journal entry to maintain a balanced accounting equation.   == ledgers == a ledger is a record of accounts.the ledger is a permanent summary of all amounts entered in supporting journals which list individual transactions by date. these accounts are recorded separately  showing their beginning/ending balance. a journal lists financial transactions in chronological order  without showing their balance but showing how much is going to be charged in each account. a ledger takes each financial transaction from the journal and records it into the corresponding account for every transaction listed. the ledger also sums up the total of every account  which is transferred into the balance sheet and the income statement. there are three different kinds of ledgers that deal with book-keeping   sales ledger  which deals mostly with the accounts receivable account. this ledger consists of the records of the financial transactions made by customers to the business. purchase ledger is the record of the purchasing transactions a company does  it goes hand in hand with the accounts payable account.   == abbreviations used in bookkeeping == a/c – account acc – account a/r – accounts receivable a/p – accounts payable b/s – balance sheet c/d – carried down b/d – brought down c/f – carried forward b/f – brought forward dr – debit side of a ledger.  dr  stands for  debit register  cr – credit side of a ledger.  cr  stands for  credit register  g/l – general ledger  (or n/l – nominal ledger) pl – profit and loss  (or i/s – income statement) p/r - payroll pp&e – property  plant and equipment tb – trial balance gst – goods and services tax vat – value added tax cst – central sale tax tds – tax deducted at source amt – alternate minimum tax ebitda – earnings before interest  taxes  depreciation and amortisation ebdta – earnings before depreciation  taxes and amortisation ebt – earnings before tax eat – earnings after tax pat – profit after tax pbt – profit before tax depr – depreciation dep – depreciation cpo – cash paid out cp - cash payment   == chart of accounts == a chart of accounts is a list of the accounts codes that can be identified with numeric  alphabetical  or alphanumeric codes allowing the account to be located in the general ledger. the equity section of the chart of accounts is based on the fact that the legal structure of the entity is of a particular legal type. possibilities include sole trader  partnership  trust  and company.   == computerized bookkeeping == computerized bookkeeping removes many of the paper  books  that are used to record the financial transactions of a business entity  instead  relational databases are used today  but typically  these still enforce the norms
of bookkeeping methodology including the single-entry and double-entry bookkeeping systems. cpas supervise the internal controls for computerized bookkeeping systems  which serve to minimize errors in documenting the numerous activities a business entity may initiate or complete over an accounting period.   == see also == accounting comparison of accounting software   == references ==   == external links == ca student blog (27 april 2017).  infographic  what are the books of prime entry . icas.com. institute of chartered accountants of scotland. retrieved 16 june 2017.
a computer programmer  sometimes called more recently a coder (especially in more informal contexts)  is a person who creates computer software. the term computer programmer can refer to a specialist in one area of computers  or to a generalist who writes code for many kinds of software.  a programmer s most often-used computer language (e.g.  assembly  cobol  c  c++  c#  java  lisp  python) may be prefixed to the term programmer. some who work with web programming languages also prefix their titles with web. a range of occupations that involve programming also often require a range of other  similar skills  for example  (software) developer  web developer  mobile applications developer  embedded firmware developer  software engineer  computer scientist  game programmer  game developer and software analyst. the use of the term programmer as applied to these positions is sometimes considered an insulting simplification or even derogatory.   == history ==  british countess and mathematician ada lovelace is often considered to be the first computer programmer  as she was the first to publish part of a program (specifically an algorithm) intended for implementation on charles babbage s analytical engine  in october 1842. the algorithm was used to calculate bernoulli numbers.  because babbage s machine was never completed as a functioning standard in lovelace s time  she unfortunately never had the opportunity to see the algorithm in action. the first person to execute a program on a functioning  modern  electronic computer was the renowned computer scientist konrad zuse  in 1941.  the eniac programming team  consisting of kay mcnulty  betty jennings  betty snyder  marlyn wescoff  fran bilas and ruth lichterman were the first regularly working programmers. international programmers  day is celebrated annually on 7 january.  in 2009  the government of russia decreed a professional annual holiday known as programmers  day to be celebrated on 13 september (12 september in leap years). it had already been an unofficial holiday before that in many countries.   === software === the word software was used as early as 1953  but did not regularly appear in print until the 1960s. before this time  computers were programmed either by customers or the few commercial computer manufacturers of the time  such as univac and ibm. the first company founded to specifically provide software products and services was the computer usage company  in 1955.the software industry expanded in the early 1960s  almost immediately after computers were first sold in mass-produced quantities. universities  governments and businesses created a demand for software. many of these programs were written in-house by full-time staff programmers  some were distributed freely between users of a particular machine for no charge. and others were developed on a commercial basis. other firms  such as computer sciences corporation (founded in 1959) also started to grow. the computer/hardware manufacturers soon started bundling operating systems  system
software and programming environments with their machines.the industry expanded greatly with the rise of the personal computer ( pc ) in the mid-1970s  which brought computing to the average  office worker. in the following years the pc also helped create a constantly-growing market for games  applications and utilities software. cp/m  later replaced by dos  microsoft s windows popular operating system of the time.in the early years of the 21st century  another successful business model has arisen for hosted software  called software-as-a-service  or saas  this was at least the third time this model had been attempted. from the point of view of producers of some proprietary software  saas reduces the concerns about unauthorized copying  since it can only be accessed through the web  and by definition  no client software is loaded onto the end user s pc.  by 2014  the role of cloud developer had been defined  in this context  one definition of a  developer  in general was published    == nature of the work == some of this section is from the occupational outlook handbook  2006–07 edition  which is in the public domain as a work of the united states government.computer programmers write  test  debug  and maintain the detailed instructions  called computer programs  that computers must follow to perform their functions. programmers also conceive  design  and test logical structures for solving problems by computer. many technical innovations in programming — advanced computing technologies and sophisticated new languages and programming tools — have redefined the role of a programmer and elevated much of the programming work done today. job titles and descriptions may vary  depending on the organization. programmers work in many settings  including corporate information technology ( it ) departments  big software companies  small service firms and government entities of all sizes. many professional programmers also work for consulting companies at client sites as contractors. licensing is not typically required to work as a programmer  although professional certifications are commonly held by programmers. programming is widely considered a profession (although some authorities disagree on the grounds that only careers with legal licensing requirements count as a profession). programmers  work varies widely depending on the type of business for which they are writing programs. for example  the instructions involved in updating financial records are very different from those required to duplicate conditions on an aircraft for pilots training in a flight simulator. simple programs can be written in a few hours  more complex ones may require more than a year of work  while others are never considered  complete  but rather are continuously improved as long as they stay in use. in most cases  several programmers work together as a team under a senior programmer’s supervision.  programmers write programs according to the specifications determined primarily by more senior programmers and by systems analysts. after the design process is complete  it
is the job of the programmer to convert that design into a logical series of instructions that the computer can follow. the programmer codes these instructions in one of many programming languages. different programming languages are used depending on the purpose of the program. cobol  for example  is commonly used for business applications that typically run on mainframe and midrange computers  whereas fortran is used in science and engineering. c++ is widely used for both scientific and business applications. java  c#  vb  and php are popular programming languages for web and business applications. programmers generally know more than one programming language and  because many languages are similar  they often can learn new languages relatively easily. in practice  programmers often are referred to by the language they know  e.g. as java programmers  or by the type of function they perform or environment in which they work  for example  database programmers  mainframe programmers  or web developers. when making changes to the source code that programs are made up of  programmers need to make other programmers aware of the task that the routine is to perform. they do this by inserting comments in the source code so that others can understand the program more easily and by documenting their code. to save work  programmers often use libraries of basic code that can be modified or customized for a specific application. this approach yields more reliable and consistent programs and increases programmers  productivity by eliminating some routine steps.   === testing and debugging === programmers test a program by running it and looking for bugs (errors). as they are identified  the programmer usually makes the appropriate corrections  then rechecks the program until an acceptably low level and severity of bugs remain. this process is called testing and debugging. these are important parts of every programmer s job. programmers may continue to fix these problems throughout the life of a program. updating  repairing  modifying  and expanding existing programs is sometimes called maintenance programming. programmers may contribute to user guides and online help  or they may work with technical writers to do such work.   === application versus system programming === computer programmers often are grouped into two broad types  application programmers and systems programmers. application programmers write programs to handle a specific job  such as a program to track inventory within an organization. they also may revise existing packaged software or customize generic applications which are frequently purchased from independent software vendors. systems programmers  in contrast  write programs to maintain and control computer systems software  such as operating systems and database management systems. these workers make changes in the instructions that determine how the network  workstations  and cpu of the system handle the various jobs they have been given and how they communicate with peripheral equipment such as printers and disk drives.   === qualifications and skills === a software developer needs to
have deep technical expertise with certain aspects of computing. some positions will require a degree in a relevant field such as computer science  information technology  engineering  programming  or any other it related post graduate studies. an ideal software developer is a self-motivated professional carrying a dynamic hands-on experience on key languages of programming such as c++  c#  php  java  c  javascript  vb  python  smalltalk. according to developer eric sink  the differences between system design  software development  and programming are more apparent. already in the current market place there can be found a segregation between programmers and developers  in that one who implements is not the same as the one who designs the class structure or hierarchy. even more so that developers become software architects or systems architects  those who design the multi-leveled architecture or component interactions of a large software system.   === types of software === programmers in software development companies may work directly with experts from various fields to create software – either programs designed for specific clients or packaged software for general use – ranging from video games to educational software to programs for desktop publishing and financial planning. programming of packaged software constitutes one of the most rapidly growing segments of the computer services industry. some companies or organizations – even small ones – have set up their own it team to ensure the design and development of in-house software to answer to very specific needs from their internal end-users  especially when existing software are not suitable or too expensive. this is for example the case in research laboratories.in some organizations  particularly small ones  people commonly known as programmer analysts are responsible for both the systems analysis and the actual programming work. the transition from a mainframe environment to one that is based primarily on personal computers (pcs) has blurred the once rigid distinction between the programmer and the user. increasingly  adept end users are taking over many of the tasks previously performed by programmers. for example  the growing use of packaged software  such as spreadsheet and database management software packages  allows users to write simple programs to access data and perform calculations.in addition  the rise of the internet has made web development a huge part of the programming field. currently more software applications are web applications that can be used by anyone with a web browser. examples of such applications include the google search service  the outlook.com e-mail service  and the flickr photo-sharing service. programming editors  also known as source code editors  are text editors that are specifically designed for programmers or developers for writing the source code of an application or a program. most of these editors include features useful for programmers  which may include color syntax highlighting  auto indentation  auto-complete  bracket matching  syntax check  and allows plug-ins. these features aid the users during coding  debugging and testing. 
 == globalization ==   === market changes in the uk === according to bbc news  17% of computer science students could not find work in their field 6 months after graduation in 2009 which was the highest rate of the university subjects surveyed while 0% of medical students were unemployed in the same survey. the uk category system does  however  class such degrees as information technology and game design as  computer science  industries in which jobs can be extremely difficult to find  somewhat inflating the actual figure.   === market changes in the us === computer programming  offshore outsourcing  and foreign worker visas became a controversial topic after the crash of the dot-com bubble left many programmers without work or with lower wages. programming was even mentioned in the 2004 us presidential debate on the topic of offshore outsourcing.large companies claim there is a skills shortage with regard to programming talent. however  us programmers and unions counter that large companies are exaggerating their case in order to obtain cheaper programmers from developing countries and avoid previously employer paid training using industry specific technologies not covered in most accredited degree programs. other reasons for employers claiming skill shortages is the result of their own cost saving combining of several disparate skill sets previously held by several specialized programmers into fewer generalized multifaceted  positions that are unlikely to have enough  qualified  candidates with the desired experience.enrollment in computer-related degrees in us has dropped recently due to lack of general interests in science and mathematics and also out of an apparent fear that programming will be subject to the same pressures as manufacturing and agriculture careers. this situation has resulted in confusion about whether the us economy is entering a  post-information age  and the nature of us comparative advantages. most academic institutions have an institutional research office that keep past statistics of degrees conferred which show several dips and rises in computer science degrees over the past 30 years. the overall trend shows a slightly overall decline in growth (especially when compared to other stem degree growth) since certain peaks of 1986  1992  2002  and 2008 showing periods of flat growth or even declines. in addition the u.s. bureau of labor statistics occupational outlook 2016-26 is -7% (a decline in their words) for computer programmers because computer programming can be done from anywhere in the world  so companies sometimes hire programmers in countries where wages are lower.   == see also ==  game programmer list of programmers software development process software engineering system administrator   == references ==  .   == further reading == weinberg  gerald m.  the psychology of computer programming  new york  van nostrand reinhold  1971 an experiential study of the nature of programming work  lucas  rob.  dreaming in code  new left review 62  march–april 2010  pp. 125–132. thompson  clive (2019). coders  the making
of a new tribe and the remaking of the world. penguin press. isbn 978-0735220560.   == external links ==  the future of it jobs in america  article how to be a programmer - an overview of the challenges of being a programmer the us department of labor description of  computer programmers software developer
a software engineer is a person who applies the principles of software engineering to the design  development  maintenance  testing  and evaluation of computer software. prior to the mid-1970s  software practitioners generally called themselves computer scientists  computer programmers or software developers  regardless of their actual jobs. many people prefer to call themselves software developer and programmer  because most widely agree what these terms mean  while the exact meaning of software engineer is still being debated.   == education == half of all practitioners today have degrees in computer science  information systems  or information technology. a small  but growing  number of practitioners have software engineering degrees. in 1987  imperial college london introduced the first three-year software engineering bachelor s degree in the uk and the world  in the following year  the university of sheffield established a similar program.  in 1996  the rochester institute of technology established the first software engineering bachelor s degree program in the united states  however  it did not obtain abet accreditation until 2003  the same time as rice university  clarkson university  milwaukee school of engineering and mississippi state university obtained theirs. in 1997  psg college of technology in coimbatore  india was the first to start a five-year integrated master of science degree in software engineering.since then  software engineering undergraduate degrees have been established at many universities. a standard international curriculum for undergraduate software engineering degrees was recently defined by the ccse. as of 2004  in the u.s.  about 50 universities offer software engineering degrees  which teach both computer science and engineering principles and practices. the first software engineering master s degree was established at seattle university in 1979. since then graduate software engineering degrees have been made available from many more universities.  likewise in canada  the canadian engineering accreditation board (ceab) of the canadian council of professional engineers has recognized several software engineering programs. in 1998  the us naval postgraduate school (nps) established the first doctorate program in software engineering in the world. additionally  many online advanced degrees in software engineering have appeared such as the master of science in software engineering (mse) degree offered through the computer science and engineering department at california state university  fullerton. steve mcconnell opines that because most universities teach computer science rather than software engineering  there is a shortage of true software engineers. ets university and uqam (université du québec à montréal) were mandated by ieee to develop the software engineering body of knowledge (swebok)  which has become an iso standard describing the body of knowledge covered by a software engineer.   === other degrees === in business  some software engineering practitioners have mis or computer information systems degrees. in embedded systems  some have electrical engineering  electronics engineering  computer science with emphasis in  embedded systems  or computer engineering degrees  because embedded software often requires a detailed understanding of hardware.
in medical software  practitioners may have medical informatics  general medical  or biology degrees.some practitioners have mathematics  science  engineering  or technology (stem) degrees. some have philosophy (logic in particular) or other non-technical degrees. for instance  barry boehm earned degrees in mathematics. and  others have no degrees.   == profession ==   === employment ===  most software engineers work as employees or contractors. software engineers work with businesses  government agencies (civilian or military)  and non-profit organizations. some software engineers work on their own as consulting software engineers. some organizations have specialists to perform all of the tasks in the software development process. other organizations separate software engineers based on specific software-engineering tasks. these companies sometimes hire interns (possibly university or college students) over a short time. in large projects  software engineers are distinguished from people who specialize in only one role because they take part in the design as well as the programming of the project. in small projects  software engineers will usually fill several or all roles at the same time. specializations include   in industry (analysts  architects  developers  testers  technical support  managers) in academia (educators  researchers)   === impact of globalization === most students in the developed world have avoided degrees related to software engineering because of the fear of offshore outsourcing (importing software products or services from other countries) and of being displaced by foreign visa workers. although government statistics do not currently show a threat to software engineering itself  a related career  computer programming does appear to have been affected. often one is expected to start out as a computer programmer before being promoted to software engineer. thus  the career path to software engineering may be rough  especially during recessions. some career counselors suggest a student also focus on  people skills  and business skills rather than purely technical skills because such  soft skills  are allegedly more difficult to offshore. reasonable command over reading  writing & speaking english is asked by most of employers. it is the quasi-management aspects of software engineering that appear to be what has kept it from being impacted by globalization.   === prizes === there are several prizes in the field of software engineering  the codie awards is a yearly award issued by the software and information industry association for excellence in software development within the software industry. jolt awards are awards in the software industry. stevens award is a software engineering award given in memory of wayne stevens.   == use of the title  engineer  ==   === origin of the term === margaret hamilton promoted the term  software engineering  during her work on the apollo program. the term  engineering  was used to acknowledge that the work should be taken just as seriously as other contributions toward the advancement of technology. hamilton details her use of the term when i first came up
with the term  no one had heard of it before  at least in our world. it was an ongoing joke for a long time. they liked to kid me about my radical ideas. it was a memorable day when one of the most respected hardware gurus explained to everyone in a meeting that he agreed with me that the process of building software should also be considered an engineering discipline  just like with hardware. not because of his acceptance of the new  term  per se  but because we had earned his and the acceptance of the others in the room as being in an engineering field in its own right.   === suitability of the term === one could argue that software engineering implies a certain level of academic training  professional discipline  adherence to formal processes  and especially legal liability that often are not applied in cases of software development. a common analogy is that working in construction does not make one a civil engineer  and so writing code does not make one a software engineer. furthermore  because computing doesn t utilize the methods of mathematical physics common to all conventional engineering disciplines  it is more appropriate to call those engaged in this occupation as software developers or similar.  in 1978  computer scientist e. w. dijkstra wrote in a paper that the coining of the term software engineer was not useful since it was an inappropriate analogy  the existence of the mere term has been the base of a number of extremely shallow—and false—analogies  which just confuse the issue... computers are such exceptional gadgets that there is good reason to assume that most analogies with other disciplines are too shallow to be of any positive value  are even so shallow that they are only confusing. in each of the last few decades  at least one radical new approach has entered the mainstream of software development (e.g. structured programming  object orientation)  implying that the field is still changing too rapidly to be considered an engineering discipline. proponents argue that the supposedly radical new approaches are evolutionary rather than revolutionary.individual commentators have disagreed sharply on how to define software engineering or its legitimacy as an engineering discipline. david parnas has said that software engineering is  in fact  a form of engineering. steve mcconnell has said that it is not  but that it should be. donald knuth has said that programming is an art and a science. edsger w. dijkstra claimed that the terms software engineering and software engineer have been misused  and should be considered harmful  particularly in the united states.   === regulatory classification ===   ==== canada ==== in canada the use of the job title engineer is controlled in each province by self-regulating professional engineering organizations who are also tasked with enforcement of the governing legislation. the intent is that any individual holding themselves out as an engineer has been verified to have
been educated to a certain accredited level and their professional practice is subject to a code of ethics and peer scrutiny. it is also illegal to use the title engineer in canada unless an individual is licensed. in ontario  the professional engineers act stipulates a minimum education level of a three-year diploma in technology from a college of applied arts and technology or a degree in a relevant science area. however  engineering undergraduates and all other applicants are not allowed to use the title of engineer until they complete the minimum amount of work experience of four years in addition to completing the professional practice examination (ppe). if the applicant does not hold an undergraduate engineering degree then they may have to take the confirmatory practice exam or specific examination program unless the exam requirements are waived by a committee.it professionals with degrees in other fields (such as computer science or information systems) are restricted from using the title software engineer  or wording software engineer in a title  depending on their province or territory of residence.in some instances  cases have been taken to court regarding the illegal use of the protected title engineer.   ==== europe ==== throughout the whole of europe  suitably qualified engineers may obtain the professional european engineer qualification.   ==== france ==== in france  the term ingénieur (engineer) is not a protected title and can be used by anyone  even by those who do not possess an academic degree. however  the title ingénieur diplomé (graduate engineer) is an official academic title that is protected by the government and is associated with the diplôme d ingénieur  which is one of the most prestigious academic degrees in france.   ==== iceland ==== the use of the title tölvunarfræðingur (computer scientist) is protected by law in iceland. software engineering is taught in computer science departments in icelandic universities. icelandic law state that a permission must be obtained from the minister of industry when the degree was awarded abroad  prior to use of the title. the title is awarded to those who have obtained a bsc degree in computer science from a recognized higher educational institution.   ==== new zealand ==== in new zealand  the institution of professional engineers new zealand (ipenz)  which licenses and regulates the country s chartered engineers (cpeng)  recognizes software engineering as a legitimate branch of professional engineering and accepts application of software engineers to obtain chartered status provided he or she has a tertiary degree of approved subjects. software engineering is included whereas computer science is normally not.   ==== united states ==== the bureau of labor statistics (bls) classifies computer software engineers as a subcategory of  computer specialists  along with occupations such as computer scientist  programmer  database administrator and network administrator. the bls classifies all other engineering disciplines  including computer hardware engineers  as engineers.many states prohibit unlicensed persons from calling themselves an engineer  or from indicating branches or specialties not
covered licensing acts. in many states  the title engineer is reserved for individuals with a professional engineering license indicating that they have shown minimum level of competency through accredited engineering education  qualified engineering experience  and engineering board s examinations.in april 2013 the national council of examiners for engineering and surveying (ncees) began offering a professional engineer (pe) exam for software engineering. the exam was developed in association with the ieee computer society. ncees will end the exam after april 2019 due to lack of participation.   == see also == bachelor of science in information technology bachelor of software engineering consulting software engineer release engineer software engineering institute   == references ==
a computer hacker is any skilled computer expert that uses their technical knowledge to overcome a problem. while  hacker  can refer to any skilled computer programmer  the term has become associated in popular culture with a  security hacker  someone who  with their technical knowledge  uses bugs or exploits to break into computer systems.   == definitions ==   === general definition === reflecting the two types of hackers  there are two definitions of the word  hacker   an adherent of the technology and programming subculture  see hacker culture. someone who is able to subvert computer security. if doing so for malicious purposes  the person can also be called a cracker.today  mainstream usage of  hacker  mostly refers to computer criminals  due to the mass media usage of the word since the 1980s. this includes what hacker slang calls  script kiddies  people breaking into computers using programs written by others  with very little knowledge about the way they work. this usage has become so predominant that the general public is largely unaware that different meanings exist. while the self-designation of hobbyists as hackers is generally acknowledged and accepted by computer security hackers  people from the programming subculture consider the computer intrusion related usage incorrect  and emphasize the difference between the two by calling security breakers  crackers  (analogous to a safecracker). the controversy is usually based on the assertion that the term originally meant someone messing about with something in a positive sense  that is  using playful cleverness to achieve a goal. but then  it is supposed  the meaning of the term shifted over the decades and came to refer to computer criminals.as the security-related usage has spread more widely  the original meaning has become less known. in popular usage and in the media   computer intruders  or  computer criminals  is the exclusive meaning of the word today. (for example   an internet  hacker  broke through state government security systems in march. ) in the computer enthusiast (hacker culture) community  the primary meaning is a complimentary description for a particularly brilliant programmer or technical expert. (for example   linus torvalds  the creator of linux  is considered by some to be a hacker. ) a large segment of the technical community insist the latter is the  correct  usage of the word (see the jargon file definition below).   === representation in mainstream media === the mainstream media s current usage of the term may be traced back to the early 1980s. when the term was introduced to wider society by the mainstream media in 1983  even those in the computer community referred to computer intrusion as  hacking  although not as the exclusive definition of the word. in reaction to the increasing media use of the term exclusively with the criminal connotation  the computer community began to differentiate their
terminology. alternative terms such as  cracker  were coined in an effort to maintain the distinction between  hackers  within the legitimate programmer community and those performing computer break-ins. further terms such as  black hat   white hat  and  gray hat  developed when laws against breaking into computers came into effect  to distinguish criminal activities from those activities which were legal.   === representation in network news === however  network news use of the term consistently pertained primarily to the criminal activities  despite the attempt by the technical community to preserve and distinguish the original meaning  so today the mainstream media and general public continue to describe computer criminals  with all levels of technical sophistication  as  hackers  and do not generally make use of the word in any of its non-criminal connotations. members of the media sometimes seem unaware of the distinction  grouping legitimate  hackers  such as linus torvalds and steve wozniak along with criminal  crackers .as a result  the definition is still the subject of heated controversy. the wider dominance of the pejorative connotation is resented by many who object to the term being taken from their cultural jargon and used negatively  including those who have historically preferred to self-identify as hackers. many advocate using the more recent and nuanced alternate terms when describing criminals and others who negatively take advantage of security flaws in software and hardware. others prefer to follow common popular usage  arguing that the positive form is confusing and unlikely to become widespread in the general public. a minority still use the term in both senses despite the controversy  leaving context to clarify (or leave ambiguous) which meaning is intended. however  because the positive definition of hacker was widely used as the predominant form for many years before the negative definition was popularized   hacker  can therefore be seen as a shibboleth  identifying those who use the technically-oriented sense (as opposed to the exclusively intrusion-oriented sense) as members of the computing community. on the other hand  due to the variety of industries software designers may find themselves in  many prefer not to be referred to as hackers because the word holds a negative denotation in many of those industries. a possible middle ground position has been suggested  based on the observation that  hacking  describes a collection of skills and tools which are used by hackers of both descriptions for differing reasons. the analogy is made to locksmithing  specifically picking locks  which is a skill which can be used for good or evil. the primary weakness of this analogy is the inclusion of script kiddies in the popular usage of  hacker  despite their lack of an underlying skill and knowledge base. sometimes   hacker  is simply used synonymously with  geek   a true hacker is not a group person. he s a person who loves to stay
up all night  he and the machine in a love-hate relationship... they re kids who tended to be brilliant but not very interested in conventional goals[...] it s a term of derision and also the ultimate compliment. fred shapiro thinks that  the common theory that  hacker  originally was a benign term and the malicious connotations of the word were a later perversion is untrue.  he found that the malicious connotations were already present at mit in 1963 (quoting the tech  an mit student newspaper)  and at that time referred to unauthorized users of the telephone network  that is  the phreaker movement that developed into the computer security hacker subculture of today.   == types ==   === hacker culture ===  hacker culture is an idea derived from a community of enthusiast computer programmers and systems designers in the 1960s around the massachusetts institute of technology s (mit s) tech model railroad club (tmrc) and the mit artificial intelligence laboratory. the concept expanded to the hobbyist home computing community  focusing on hardware in the late 1970s (e.g. the homebrew computer club) and on software (video games  software cracking  the demoscene) in the 1980s/1990s. later  this would go on to encompass many new definitions such as art  and life hacking.   === security related hacking ===  security hackers are people involved with circumvention of computer security. among security hackers  there are several types  including  white hats are hackers who work to keep data safe from other hackers by finding system vulnerabilities that can be mitigated. white hats are usually employed by the target system s owner and are typically paid (sometimes quite well) for their work. their work is not illegal because it is done with the system owner s consent. black hats or crackers are hackers with malicious intentions. they often steal  exploit  and sell data  and are usually motivated by personal gain. their work is usually illegal. a cracker is like a black hat hacker  but is specifically someone who is very skilled and tries via hacking to make profits or to benefit  not just to vandalize. crackers find exploits for system vulnerabilities and often use them to their advantage by either selling the fix to the system owner or selling the exploit to other black hat hackers  who in turn use it to steal information or gain royalties. grey hats include those who hack for fun or to troll. they may both fix and exploit vulnerabilities  but usually not for financial gain.  even if not malicious  their work can still be illegal  if done without the target system owner s consent  and grey hats are usually associated with black hat hackers.   == motives == four primary motives have been proposed as possibilities for why hackers attempt to break into computers and networks. first  there is a criminal financial gain to be had when hacking systems
with the specific purpose of stealing credit card numbers or manipulating banking systems. second  many hackers thrive off of increasing their reputation within the hacker subculture and will leave their handles on websites they defaced or leave some other evidence as proof that they were involved in a specific hack. third  corporate espionage allows companies to acquire information on products or services that can be stolen or used as leverage within the marketplace. and fourth  state-sponsored attacks provide nation states with both wartime and intelligence collection options conducted on  in  or through cyberspace.   == overlaps and differences == the main basic difference between programmer subculture and computer security hacker is their mostly separate historical origin and development. however  the jargon file reports that considerable overlap existed for the early phreaking at the beginning of the 1970s. an article from mit s student paper the tech used the term hacker in this context already in 1963 in its pejorative meaning for someone messing with the phone system. the overlap quickly started to break when people joined in the activity who did it in a less responsible way. this was the case after the publication of an article exposing the activities of draper and engressia. according to raymond  hackers from the programmer subculture usually work openly and use their real name  while computer security hackers prefer secretive groups and identity-concealing aliases. also  their activities in practice are largely distinct. the former focus on creating new and improving existing infrastructure (especially the software environment they work with)  while the latter primarily and strongly emphasize the general act of circumvention of security measures  with the effective use of the knowledge (which can be to report and help fixing the security bugs  or exploitation reasons) being only rather secondary. the most visible difference in these views was in the design of the mit hackers  incompatible timesharing system  which deliberately did not have any security measures. there are some subtle overlaps  however  since basic knowledge about computer security is also common within the programmer subculture of hackers. for example  ken thompson noted during his 1983 turing award lecture that it is possible to add code to the unix  login  command that would accept either the intended encrypted password or a particular known password  allowing a backdoor into the system with the latter password. he named his invention the  trojan horse . furthermore  thompson argued  the c compiler itself could be modified to automatically generate the rogue code  to make detecting the modification even harder. because the compiler is itself a program generated from a compiler  the trojan horse could also be automatically installed in a new compiler program  without any detectable modification to the source of the new compiler. however  thompson disassociated himself strictly from the computer security hackers   i would like to criticize the press in its handling of the  hackers  the 414 gang
 the dalton gang  etc. the acts performed by these kids are vandalism at best and probably trespass and theft at worst. ... i have watched kids testifying before congress. it is clear that they are completely unaware of the seriousness of their acts. the programmer subculture of hackers sees secondary circumvention of security mechanisms as legitimate if it is done to get practical barriers out of the way for doing actual work. in special forms  that can even be an expression of playful cleverness. however  the systematic and primary engagement in such activities is not one of the actual interests of the programmer subculture of hackers and it does not have significance in its actual activities  either. a further difference is that  historically  members of the programmer subculture of hackers were working at academic institutions and used the computing environment there. in contrast  the prototypical computer security hacker had access exclusively to a home computer and a modem. however  since the mid-1990s  with home computers that could run unix-like operating systems and with inexpensive internet home access being available for the first time  many people from outside of the academic world started to take part in the programmer subculture of hacking. since the mid-1980s  there are some overlaps in ideas and members with the computer security hacking community. the most prominent case is robert t. morris  who was a user of mit-ai  yet wrote the morris worm. the jargon file hence calls him  a true hacker who blundered . nevertheless  members of the programmer subculture have a tendency to look down on and disassociate from these overlaps. they commonly refer disparagingly to people in the computer security subculture as crackers and refuse to accept any definition of hacker that encompasses such activities. the computer security hacking subculture  on the other hand  tends not to distinguish between the two subcultures as harshly  acknowledging that they have much in common including many members  political and social goals  and a love of learning about technology. they restrict the use of the term cracker to their categories of script kiddies and black hat hackers instead. all three subcultures have relations to hardware modifications. in the early days of network hacking  phreaks were building blue boxes and various variants. the programmer subculture of hackers has stories about several hardware hacks in its folklore  such as a mysterious  magic  switch attached to a pdp-10 computer in mit s ai lab  that when turned off  crashed the computer. the early hobbyist hackers built their home computers themselves  from construction kits. however  all these activities have died out during the 1980s  when the phone network switched to digitally controlled switchboards  causing network hacking to shift to dialing remote computers with modems  when pre-assembled inexpensive home computers were available  and when academic institutions started to give individual mass-produced workstation computers to scientists instead of using a central timesharing
system. the only kind of widespread hardware modification nowadays is case modding. an encounter of the programmer and the computer security hacker subculture occurred at the end of the 1980s  when a group of computer security hackers  sympathizing with the chaos computer club (which disclaimed any knowledge in these activities)  broke into computers of american military organizations and academic institutions. they sold data from these machines to the soviet secret service  one of them in order to fund his drug addiction. the case was solved when clifford stoll  a scientist working as a system administrator  found ways to log the attacks and to trace them back (with the help of many others). 23  a german film adaption with fictional elements  shows the events from the attackers  perspective. stoll described the case in his book the cuckoo s egg and in the tv documentary the kgb  the computer  and me from the other perspective. according to eric s. raymond  it  nicely illustrates the difference between  hacker  and  cracker . stoll s portrait of himself  his lady martha  and his friends at berkeley and on the internet paints a marvelously vivid picture of how hackers and the people around them like to live and how they think.    == see also == script kiddie  an unskilled computer security attacker   == references ==   == further reading ==   === computer security ===   === free software/open source ===   == external links ==  hacking at wikibooks  the dictionary definition of hacker at wiktionary  media related to hackers at wikimedia commons
a computer scientist is a person who has acquired the knowledge of computer science  the study of the theoretical foundations of information and computation and their application.computer scientists typically work on the theoretical side of computer systems  as opposed to the hardware side on which computer engineers mainly focus (although there is overlap). although computer scientists can also focus their work and research on specific areas (such as algorithm and data structure development and design  software engineering  information theory  database theory  computational complexity theory  numerical analysis  programming language theory  computer graphics  and computer vision)  their foundation is the theoretical study of computing from which these other fields derive.a primary goal of computer scientists is to develop or validate models  often mathematical  to describe the properties of computer-based systems (processors  programs  computers interacting with people  computers interacting with other computers  etc.) with an overall objective of discovering designs that yield useful benefits (faster  smaller  cheaper  more precise  etc.).   == education == most computer scientists are required to possess a ph.d.  m.s.  or b.s. in computer science  or other similar fields like information and computer science (cis)  or a closely related discipline such as mathematics or physics.   === areas of specialization === theoretical computer science – including data structures and algorithms  theory of computation  information theory and coding theory  programming language theory  and formal methods computer systems – including computer architecture and computer engineering  computer performance analysis  concurrency  and distributed computing  computer networks  computer security and cryptography  and databases. computer applications – including computer graphics and visualization  human–computer interaction  scientific computing  and artificial intelligence. software engineering - the application of engineering to software development in a systematic method   == employment == computer scientists are often hired by software publishing firms  scientific research and development organizations where they develop the theories that allow new technologies to be developed. computer scientists are also employed by educational institutions such as universities. computer scientists can follow more practical applications of their knowledge  doing things such as software engineering. they can also be found in the field of information technology consulting  and may be seen as a type of mathematician  given how much of the field depends on mathematics. computer scientists employed in industry may eventually advance into managerial or project leadership positions.employment prospects for computer scientists are said to be excellent. such prospects seem to be attributed  in part  to very rapid growth in computer systems design and related services industry  and the software publishing industry  which are projected to be among the fastest growing industries in the u.s. economy.   == see also ==   == references ==
a physician  medical practitioner  medical doctor  or simply doctor  is a professional who practises medicine  which is concerned with promoting  maintaining  or restoring health through the study  diagnosis  prognosis and treatment of disease  injury  and other physical and mental impairments. physicians may focus their practice on certain disease categories  types of patients  and methods of treatment—known as specialities—or they may assume responsibility for the provision of continuing and comprehensive medical care to individuals  families  and communities—known as general practice. medical practice properly requires both a detailed knowledge of the academic disciplines  such as anatomy and physiology  underlying diseases and their treatment—the science of medicine—and also a decent competence in its applied practice—the art or craft of medicine. both the role of the physician and the meaning of the word itself vary around the world. degrees and other qualifications vary widely  but there are some common elements  such as medical ethics requiring that physicians show consideration  compassion  and benevolence for their patients.   == modern meanings ==   === specialist in internal medicine ===  around the world the term physician refers to a specialist in internal medicine or one of its many sub-specialties (especially as opposed to a specialist in surgery). this meaning of physician conveys a sense of expertise in treatment by drugs or medications  rather than by the procedures of surgeons.this term is at least nine hundred years old in english  physicians and surgeons were once members of separate professions  and traditionally were rivals. the shorter oxford english dictionary  third edition  gives a middle english quotation making this contrast  from as early as 1400   o lord  whi is it so greet difference betwixe a cirugian and a physician. henry viii granted a charter to the london royal college of physicians in 1518. it was not until 1540 that he granted the company of barber-surgeons (ancestor of the royal college of surgeons) its separate charter. in the same year  the english monarch established the regius professorship of physic at the university of cambridge. newer universities would probably describe such an academic as a professor of internal medicine. hence  in the 16th century  physic meant roughly what internal medicine does now. currently  a specialist physician in the united states may be described as an internist. another term  hospitalist  was introduced in 1996  to describe us specialists in internal medicine who work largely or exclusively in hospitals. such  hospitalists  now make up about 19% of all us general internists  who are often called general physicians in commonwealth countries. this original use  as distinct from surgeon  is common in most of the world including the united kingdom and other commonwealth countries (such as australia  bangladesh  india  new zealand  pakistan  south africa  sri lanka  zimbabwe)  as well as in places as diverse as
brazil  hong kong  indonesia  japan  ireland  and taiwan. in such places  the more general english terms doctor or medical practitioner are prevalent  describing any practitioner of medicine (whom an american would likely call a physician  in the broad sense). in commonwealth countries  specialist pediatricians and geriatricians are also described as specialist physicians who have sub-specialized by age of patient rather than by organ system.   === physician and surgeon === around the world  the combined term  physician and surgeon  is used to describe either a general practitioner or any medical practitioner irrespective of specialty. this usage still shows the original meaning of physician and preserves the old difference between a physician  as a practitioner of physic  and a surgeon. the term may be used by state medical boards in the united states of america  and by equivalent bodies in provinces of canada  to describe any medical practitioner.   === north america ===  in modern english  the term physician is used in two main ways  with relatively broad and narrow meanings respectively. this is the result of history and is often confusing. these meanings and variations are explained below.  in the united states and canada  the term physician describes all medical practitioners holding a professional medical degree. the american medical association  established in 1847  as well as the american osteopathic association  founded in 1897  both currently use the term physician to describe members. however  the american college of physicians  established in 1915  does not  its title uses physician in its original sense.   ==== american physicians ==== the vast majority of physicians trained in the united states have a doctor of medicine degree  and use the initials m.d. a smaller number attend osteopathic schools and have a doctor of osteopathic medicine degree and use the initials d.o. after completion of medical school  physicians complete a residency in the specialty in which they will practice. subspecialties require the completion of a fellowship after residency.  all boards of certification now require that physicians demonstrate  by examination  continuing mastery of the core knowledge and skills for a chosen specialty. recertification varies by particular specialty between every seven and every ten years.   ==== podiatric physicians ==== also in the united states  the american podiatric medical association (apma) defines podiatrists as physicians and surgeons that fall under the department of surgery in hospitals. they undergo training with the doctor of podiatric medicine (dpm) degree. this degree is also available at one canadian university  namely the université du québec à trois-rivières. students are typically required to complete an internship in new york prior to the obtention of their professional degree.   == shortage ==  many countries in the developing world have the problem of too few physicians.  in 2015  the association of american medical colleges warned that the us will face a doctor shortage
of as many as 90 000 by 2025.   == social role and world view ==   === biomedicine === within western culture and over recent centuries  medicine has become increasingly based on scientific reductionism and materialism. this style of medicine is now dominant throughout the industrialized world  and is often termed biomedicine by medical anthropologists. biomedicine  formulates the human body and disease in a culturally distinctive pattern  and is a world view learnt by medical students. within this tradition  the medical model is a term for the complete  set of procedures in which all doctors are trained  (r. d. laing  1972)  including mental attitudes. a particularly clear expression of this world view  currently dominant among conventional physicians  is evidence-based medicine. within conventional medicine  most physicians still pay heed to their ancient traditions    the critical sense and sceptical attitude of the citation of medicine from the shackles of priestcraft and of caste  secondly  the conception of medicine as an art based on accurate observation  and as a science  an integral part of the science of man and of nature  thirdly  the high moral ideals  expressed in that most  memorable of human documents  (gomperz)  the hippocratic oath  and fourthly  the conception and realization of medicine as the profession of a cultivated gentleman.— sir william osler  chauvanism in medicine (1902)  in this western tradition  physicians are considered to be members of a learned profession  and enjoy high social status  often combined with expectations of a high and stable income and job security. however  medical practitioners often work long and inflexible hours  with shifts at unsociable times. their high status is partly from their extensive training requirements  and also because of their occupation s special ethical and legal duties. the term traditionally used by physicians to describe a person seeking their help is the word patient (although one who visits a physician for a routine check-up may also be so described). this word patient is an ancient reminder of medical duty  as it originally meant  one who suffers . the english noun comes from the latin word patiens  the present participle of the deponent verb  patior  meaning  i am suffering  and akin to the greek verb πάσχειν (= paskhein  to suffer) and its cognate noun πάθος (= pathos).physicians in the original  narrow sense (specialist physicians or internists  see above) are commonly members or fellows of professional organizations  such as the american college of physicians or the royal college of physicians in the united kingdom  and such hard-won membership is itself a mark of status.   === alternative medicine === while contemporary biomedicine has distanced itself from its ancient roots in religion and magic  many forms of traditional medicine and alternative medicine continue to espouse vitalism in various guises   as long as life
had its own secret properties  it was possible to have sciences and medicines based on those properties  (grossinger 1980). the us national center for complementary and alternative medicine (nccam) classifies cam therapies into five categories or domains  including  alternative medical systems  or complete systems of therapy and practice  mind-body interventions  or techniques designed to facilitate the mind s effect on bodily functions and symptoms  biologically based systems including herbalism  and manipulative and body-based methods such as chiropractic and massage therapy. in considering these alternate traditions that differ from biomedicine (see above)  medical anthropologists emphasize that all ways of thinking about health and disease have a significant cultural content  including conventional western medicine.ayurveda  unani medicine and homeopathy are popular types of alternative medicine. they are included in national system of medicines in countries such as india. in general  the practitioners of these medicine in these countries are referred to as vaidya  hakim and homeopathic doctor/homeopath/homeopathic physician  respectively.   === physicians  own health === some commentators have argued that physicians have duties to serve as role models for the general public in matters of health  for example by not smoking cigarettes. indeed  in most western nations relatively few physicians smoke  and their professional knowledge does appear to have a beneficial effect on their health and lifestyle. according to a study of male physicians  life expectancy is slightly higher for physicians (73.0 years for white and 68.7 for black) than lawyers or many other highly educated professionals. causes of death less likely in physicians than the general population include respiratory disease (including pneumonia  pneumoconioses  copd  but excluding emphysema and other chronic airway obstruction)  alcohol-related deaths  rectosigmoidal and anal cancers  and bacterial diseases.physicians do experience exposure to occupational hazards  and there is a well-known aphorism that  doctors make the worst patients . causes of death that are shown to be higher in the physician population include suicide among doctors and self-inflicted injury  drug-related causes  traffic accidents  and cerebrovascular and ischaemic heart disease.   == education and training ==  medical education and career pathways for doctors vary considerably across the world.   === all medical practitioners === in all developed countries  entry-level medical education programs are tertiary-level courses  undertaken at a medical school attached to a university. depending on jurisdiction and university  entry may follow directly from secondary school or require pre-requisite undergraduate education. the former commonly takes five or six years to complete. programs that require previous undergraduate education (typically a three- or four-year degree  often in science) are usually four or five years in length. hence  gaining a basic medical degree may typically take from five to eight years  depending on jurisdiction and university. following completion of entry-level training  newly graduated medical practitioners are often required to undertake a period of supervised practice before full registration is granted  typically one or two
years. this may be referred to as an  internship  as the  foundation  years in the uk  or as  conditional registration . some jurisdictions  including the united states  require residencies for practice. medical practitioners hold a medical degree specific to the university from which they graduated. this degree qualifies the medical practitioner to become licensed or registered under the laws of that particular country  and sometimes of several countries  subject to requirements for internship or conditional registration.   === specialists in internal medicine === specialty training is begun immediately following completion of entry-level training  or even before. in other jurisdictions  junior medical doctors must undertake generalist (un-streamed) training for one or more years before commencing specialization. hence  depending on jurisdiction  a specialist physician (internist) often does not achieve recognition as a specialist until twelve or more years after commencing basic medical training—five to eight years at university to obtain a basic medical qualification  and up to another nine years to become a specialist.   == regulation == in most jurisdictions  physicians (in either sense of the word) need government permission to practice. such permission is intended to promote public safety  and often to protect the public purse  as medical care is commonly subsidized by national governments. in some jurisdictions (e.g.  singapore)  it is common for physicians to inflate their qualifications with the title  dr  in correspondence or namecards  even if their qualifications are limited to a basic (e.g.  bachelor level) degree. in other countries (e.g.  germany)  only physicians holding an academic doctorate may call themselves doctor – on the other hand  the european research council has decided that the german medical doctorate does not meet the international standards of a phd research degree.   === all medical practitioners === among the english-speaking countries  this process is known either as licensure as in the united states  or as registration in the united kingdom  other commonwealth countries  and ireland. synonyms in use elsewhere include colegiación in spain  ishi menkyo in japan  autorisasjon in norway  approbation in germany  and  άδεια εργασίας  in greece. in france  italy and portugal  civilian physicians must be members of the order of physicians to practice medicine. in some countries  including the united kingdom and ireland  the profession largely regulates itself  with the government affirming the regulating body s authority. the best known example of this is probably the general medical council of britain. in all countries  the regulating authorities will revoke permission to practice in cases of malpractice or serious misconduct. in the large english-speaking federations (united states  canada  australia)  the licensing or registration of medical practitioners is done at a state or provincial level or nationally as in new zealand. australian states usually have a  medical board  which has now been replaced by the australian health practitioner regulatory authority
(ahpra) in most states  while canadian provinces usually have a  college of physicians and surgeons.  all american states have an agency that is usually called the  medical board  although there are alternate names such as  board of medicine   board of medical examiners   board of medical licensure   board of healing arts  or some other variation. after graduating from a first-professional school  physicians who wish to practice in the u.s. usually take standardized exams  such as the usmle for mds).   === specialists in internal medicine === most countries have some method of officially recognizing specialist qualifications in all branches of medicine  including internal medicine. sometimes  this aims to promote public safety by restricting the use of hazardous treatments. other reasons for regulating specialists may include standardization of recognition for hospital employment and restriction on which practitioners are entitled to receive higher insurance payments for specialist services.   === performance and professionalism supervision === the issue of medical errors  drug abuse  and other issues in physician professional behavior received significant attention across the world  in particular following a critical 2000 report which  arguably launched  the patient-safety movement. in the u.s.  as of 2006 there were few organizations that systematically monitored performance. in the u.s. only the department of veterans affairs randomly drug tests  in contrast to drug testing practices for other professions that have a major impact on public welfare. licensing boards at the u.s. state level depend upon continuing education to maintain competence. through the utilization of the national practitioner data bank  federation of state medical boards disciplinary report  and american medical association physician profile service  the 67 state medical boards (md/do) continually self-report any adverse/disciplinary actions taken against a licensed physician in order that the other medical boards in which the physician holds or is applying for a medical license will be properly notified so that corrective  reciprocal action can be taken against the offending physician. in europe  as of 2009 the health systems are governed according to various national laws  and can also vary according to regional differences similar to the united states.   == see also ==   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to physicians at wikimedia commons  the dictionary definition of physician at wiktionary
a screenplay writer (also called screenwriter for short)  scriptwriter or scenarist is a writer who practices the craft of screenwriting  writing screenplays on which mass media  such as films  television programs and video games  are based.   == profession == screenwriting is a freelance profession. no education is required to become a professional screenwriter  just good storytelling abilities and imagination. screenwriters are not hired employees but contracted freelancers. most  if not all  screenwriters start their careers writing on speculation (spec) and so write without being hired or paid for it. if such a script is sold  it is called a spec script. what separates a professional screenwriter from an amateur screenwriter is that professional screenwriters are usually represented by a talent agency. also  professional screenwriters do not often work for free  but amateur screenwriters will often work for free and are considered  writers in training.  spec scripts are usually penned by unknown professional screenwriters and amateur screenwriters. there are a legion of would-be screenwriters who attempt to enter the film industry  but it often takes years of trial-and-error  failure  and gritty persistence to achieve success. in writing screenplays that sell  michael hague writes   screenplays have become  for the last half of [the twentieth] century  what the great american novel was for the first half. closet writers who used to dream of the glory of getting into print now dream of seeing their story on the big or small screen.    == film industry == every screenplay and teleplay begins with a thought or idea  and screenwriters use their ideas to write scripts  with the intention of selling them and having them produced. in some cases  the script is based on an existing property  such as a book or person s life story  which is adapted by the screenwriter. the majority of the time  a film project gets initiated by a screenwriter. the initiator of the project gets the exclusive writing assignment. they are referred to as  exclusive  assignments or  pitched  assignments. screenwriters who often pitch new projects  whether original or an adaptation  often do not have to worry about competing for assignments and are often more successful. when word is put out about a project a film studio  production company  or producer wants done  they are referred to as  open  assignments. open assignments are more competitive. if screenwriters are competing for an open assignment  more-established writers usually win the assignments. a screenwriter can also be approached and personally offered a writing assignment.   == script doctoring == many screenwriters also work as full or part-time script doctors  attempting to better a script to suit the desires of a director or studio. for instance  studio management may have a complaint that the motivations of the characters are unclear or that the dialogue is weak. script-doctoring can be quite
lucrative  especially for the better-known writers. david mamet and john sayles  for instance  fund the movies that they direct themselves  usually from their own screenplays  by writing and doctoring scripts for others. in fact  some writers make very profitable careers out of being the ninth or tenth writer to work on a piece  and they often work on projects that never see exposure to an audience of any size. many up-and-coming screenwriters also ghostwrite projects and allow more-established screenwriters to take public credit for the project to increase the chances of it getting picked up. hollywood has shifted writers onto and off projects since its earliest days  and assignment of credits is not always straightforward or complete  which poses a problem for film study. in his book talking pictures  richard corliss discussed the historian s dilemma   a writer may be given screen credit for work he didn t do (as with sidney buchman on holiday)  or be denied credit for work he did do (as with sidney buchman on the awful truth).    == development process == after a screenwriter finishes a project  he or she pairs with an industry-based representative  such as a producer  director  literary agent  entertainment lawyer  or entertainment executive. the partnerships often pitch their project to investors or others in a position to further a project. once the script is sold  the writer has only the rights that were agreed with the purchaser.a screenwriter becomes credible by having work that is recognized  which gives the writer the opportunity to earn a higher income. as more films are produced independently (outside the studio system)  many up-and-coming screenwriters are turning to pitch fests  screenplay contests  and independent development services to gain access to established and credible independent producers. many development executives are now working independently to incubate their own pet projects.   == production involvement == screenwriters are rarely involved in the development of a film. sometimes they come on as advisors  or if they are established  as a producer. some screenwriters also direct. although many scripts are sold each year  many do not make it into production because the number of scripts that are purchased every year exceeds the number of professional directors that are working in the film and tv industry. when a screenwriter finishes a project and sells it to a film studio  production company  tv network  or producer  he or she often has to continue networking  mainly with directors or executives  and push to have their projects  chosen  and turned into films or tv shows. if interest in a script begins to fade  a project can go dead.   == union == most professional screenwriters in the u.s. are unionized and are represented by the writers guild of america. although membership in the wga is recommended  it is not required of a screenwriter to join.
the wga is the final arbiter on awarding writing credit for projects under its jurisdiction.  the wga also looks upon and verifies film copyright materials.   == see also == film crew first look deal lists of screenwriters list of screenwriting software playwright screenwriter s salary script (comics) showrunner television crew television director television program creator wga screenwriting credit system   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to screenwriters at wikimedia commons
a poet is a person who creates poetry. poets may describe themselves as such or be described as such by others. a poet may simply be a writer of poetry  or may perform their art to an audience.  the work of a poet is essentially one of communication  either expressing ideas in a literal sense  such as writing about a specific event or place  or metaphorically. poets have existed since antiquity  in nearly all languages  and have produced works that vary greatly in different cultures and periods. throughout each civilization and language  poets have used various styles that have changed through the course of literary history  resulting in a history of poets as diverse as the literature they have produced.   == history ==  in ancient rome  professional poets were generally sponsored by patrons  wealthy supporters including nobility and military officials. for instance  gaius cilnius maecenas  friend to caesar augustus  was an important patron for the augustan poets  including both horace and virgil. poets held an important position in pre-islamic arabic society with the poet or sha ir filling the role of historian  soothsayer and propagandist. words in praise of the tribe (qit ah) and lampoons denigrating other tribes (hija ) seem to have been some of the most popular forms of early poetry. the sha ir represented an individual tribe s prestige and importance in the arabian peninsula  and mock battles in poetry or zajal would stand in lieu of real wars.  ukaz  a market town not far from mecca  would play host to a regular poetry festival where the craft of the sha irs would be exhibited. in the high middle ages  troubadors were an important class of poets and came from a variety of backgrounds. they lived and travelled in many different places and were looked upon as actors or musicians as much as poets. they were often under patronage  but many travelled extensively. the renaissance period saw a continuation of patronage of poets by royalty. many poets  however  had other sources of income  including  italians like dante aligheri  giovanni boccaccio and petrarch s works in a pharmacist s guild and william shakespeare s work in the theater. in the romantic period and onwards  many poets were independent writers who made their living through their work  often supplemented by income from other occupations or from family. this included poets such as william wordsworth and robert burns. poets such as virgil in the aeneid and john milton in paradise lost invoked the aid of a muse.   == education == poets of earlier times were often well read and highly educated people while others were to a large extent self-educated. a few poets such as john gower and john milton were able to write poetry in more than one language. some portuguese poets  as francisco de sá de miranda  wrote not only in portuguese but also
in spanish. jan kochanowski wrote in polish and in latin  france prešeren and karel hynek mácha wrote some poems in german  although they were poets of slovenian and czech respectively. adam mickiewicz  the greatest poet of polish language  wrote a latin ode for emperor napoleon iii. another example is jerzy pietrkiewicz  a polish poet. when he moved to great britain  he ceased to write poetry in polish  but started writing novel in english. he also translated poetry from english and into english. many universities offer degrees in creative writing though these only came into existence in the 20th century. while these courses are not necessary for a career as a poet  they can be helpful as training  and for giving the student several years of time focused on their writing.   == see also == list of poets bard lyricist   == references ==   == further reading == reginald gibbons (ed)  the poet s work  29 poets on the origins and practice of their art. university of chicago press (1979). isbn 9780226290546 at google books   == external links == poets  graves
a lyricist or lyrist is a person who writes lyrics—words for songs—as opposed to a composer  who writes the song s music which may include but not limited to the melody  harmony  arrangement and accompaniment.   == royalties == a lyricist s income derives from royalties received from original songs. royalties may range from 50% of the song if it was written primarily with the composer  or less if they wrote the song in collaboration. songs are automatically copyrighted as soon as they are in tangible forms  such as a recording or sheet music. however  before a song is published or made public  its author or publisher should register it with the copyright office at the u.s. library of congress to better protect against copyright infringement.   == collaboration == collaboration takes different forms. some composers and lyricists work closely together on a song  with each having an input into both words and tune. usually a lyricist fills in the words to a tune already fully written out. dorothy fields worked in this way. lyricists have often added words to an established tune  as johnny burke did with the erroll garner tune misty. some partnerships work almost totally independently  for example  bernie taupin writes lyrics and hands them over to elton john  who then sets them to music  with minimum interaction between the two men.   == religious song-writing == in the christian hymn-singing tradition  many of the popular pieces have words written to fit existing melodies. the christmas carol   what child is this  had its words set to an old english folk tune that had been a lover s lament   greensleeves . the english composer ralph vaughan williams famously set existing poems  by men like william cowper and charles wesley  to traditional folk tunes to create hymns  many of which he published in the english hymnal. a different way this happened was the marriage of unrelated words and tune  a well-known example being the star-spangled banner  the national anthem of the united states  with words written by francis scott key strictly as a poem  which was later set to the tune of an old drinking song.   == classical music == in opera  the librettist is responsible for all text  whether spoken or sung in recitative or aria.   == see also == composer singer-songwriter   == references ==   == external links ==
aviation  or air transport  refers to the activities surrounding mechanical flight and the aircraft industry. aircraft includes fixed-wing and rotary-wing types  morphable wings  wing-less lifting bodies  as well as lighter-than-air craft such as balloons and airships. aviation began in the 18th century with the development of the hot air balloon  an apparatus capable of atmospheric displacement through buoyancy. some of the most significant advancements in aviation technology came with the controlled gliding flying of otto lilienthal in 1896  then a large step in significance came with the construction of the first powered airplane by the wright brothers in the early 1900s. since that time  aviation has been technologically revolutionized by the introduction of the jet which permitted a major form of transport throughout the world.   == etymology == the word aviation was coined by the french writer and former naval officer gabriel la landelle in 1863. he derived the term from the verb avier (an unsuccessful neologism for  to fly )  itself derived from the latin word avis ( bird ) and the suffix -ation.   == history ==   === early beginnings === there are early legends of human flight such as the stories of icarus in greek myth  jamshid and shah kay kāvus in persian myth  and the flying automaton of archytas of tarentum (428–347 bc). later  somewhat more credible claims of short-distance human flights appear  such as the winged flights of abbas ibn firnas (810–887)  eilmer of malmesbury (11th century)  and the hot-air passarola of bartholomeu lourenço de gusmão (1685–1724).   === lighter than air ===  the modern age of aviation began with the first untethered human lighter-than-air flight on november 21  1783  of a hot air balloon designed by the montgolfier brothers. the practicality of balloons was limited because they could only travel downwind. it was immediately recognized that a steerable  or dirigible  balloon was required. jean-pierre blanchard flew the first human-powered dirigible in 1784 and crossed the english channel in one in 1785. rigid airships became the first aircraft to transport passengers and cargo over great distances. the best known aircraft of this type were manufactured by the german zeppelin company. the most successful zeppelin was the graf zeppelin. it flew over one million miles  including an around-the-world flight in august 1929. however  the dominance of the zeppelins over the airplanes of that period  which had a range of only a few hundred miles  was diminishing as airplane design advanced. the  golden age  of the airships ended on may 6  1937 when the hindenburg caught fire  killing 36 people. the cause of the hindenburg accident was initially blamed on the use of hydrogen instead of helium as the lift gas. an internal investigation by the manufacturer revealed that the coating used in the material covering the frame was highly flammable and allowed static electricity to build up in the airship. changes to the
coating formulation reduced the risk of further hindenburg type accidents. although there have been periodic initiatives to revive their use  airships have seen only niche application since that time.   === heavier than air === in 1799  sir george cayley set forth the concept of the modern airplane as a fixed-wing flying machine with separate systems for lift  propulsion  and control. early dirigible developments included machine-powered propulsion (henri giffard  1852)  rigid frames (david schwarz  1896) and improved speed and maneuverability (alberto santos-dumont  1901)  there are many competing claims for the earliest powered  heavier-than-air flight. the first recorded powered flight was carried out by clément ader on october 9  1890 in his bat-winged  fully self-propelled fixed-wing aircraft  the ader éole. it was reportedly the first manned  powered  heavier-than-air flight of a significant distance (50 m (160 ft)) but insignificant altitude from level ground. seven years later  on 14 october 1897  ader s avion iii was tested without success in front of two officials from the french war ministry. the report on the trials was not publicized until 1910  as they had been a military secret. in november 1906  ader claimed to have made a successful flight on 14 october 1897  achieving an  uninterrupted flight  of around 300 metres (980 feet). although widely believed at the time  these claims were later discredited.the wright brothers made the first successful powered  controlled and sustained airplane flight on december 17  1903  a feat made possible by their invention of three-axis control. only a decade later  at the start of world war i  heavier-than-air powered aircraft had become practical for reconnaissance  artillery spotting  and even attacks against ground positions. aircraft began to transport people and cargo as designs grew larger and more reliable. the wright brothers took aloft the first passenger  charles furnas  one of their mechanics  on may 14  1908.during the 1920s and 1930s great progress was made in the field of aviation  including the first transatlantic flight of alcock and brown in 1919  charles lindbergh s solo transatlantic flight in 1927  and charles kingsford smith s transpacific flight the following year. one of the most successful designs of this period was the douglas dc-3  which became the first airliner to be profitable carrying passengers exclusively  starting the modern era of passenger airline service. by the beginning of world war ii  many towns and cities had built airports  and there were numerous qualified pilots available. the war brought many innovations to aviation  including the first jet aircraft and the first liquid-fueled rockets.  after world war ii  especially in north america  there was a boom in general aviation  both private and commercial  as thousands of pilots were released from military service and many inexpensive war-surplus transport and training aircraft became available. manufacturers such as cessna  piper  and beechcraft
expanded production to provide light aircraft for the new middle-class market. by the 1950s  the development of civil jets grew  beginning with the de havilland comet  though the first widely used passenger jet was the boeing 707  because it was much more economical than other aircraft at that time. at the same time  turboprop propulsion began to appear for smaller commuter planes  making it possible to serve small-volume routes in a much wider range of weather conditions. since the 1960s composite material airframes and quieter  more efficient engines have become available  and concorde provided supersonic passenger service for more than two decades  but the most important lasting innovations have taken place in instrumentation and control. the arrival of solid-state electronics  the global positioning system  satellite communications  and increasingly small and powerful computers and led displays  have dramatically changed the cockpits of airliners and  increasingly  of smaller aircraft as well. pilots can navigate much more accurately and view terrain  obstructions  and other nearby aircraft on a map or through synthetic vision  even at night or in low visibility. on june 21  2004  spaceshipone became the first privately funded aircraft to make a spaceflight  opening the possibility of an aviation market capable of leaving the earth s atmosphere. meanwhile  flying prototypes of aircraft powered by alternative fuels  such as ethanol  electricity  and even solar energy  are becoming more common.   == operations of aircraft ==   === civil aviation ===   civil aviation includes all non-military flying  both general aviation and scheduled air transport.   ==== air transport ====  there are five major manufacturers of civil transport aircraft (in alphabetical order)   airbus  based in europe boeing  based in the united states bombardier  based in canada embraer  based in brazil united aircraft corporation  based in russiaboeing  airbus  ilyushin and tupolev concentrate on wide-body and narrow-body jet airliners  while bombardier  embraer and sukhoi concentrate on regional airliners. large networks of specialized parts suppliers from around the world support these manufacturers  who sometimes provide only the initial design and final assembly in their own plants. the chinese acac consortium will also soon enter the civil transport market with its comac arj21 regional jet.until the 1970s  most major airlines were flag carriers  sponsored by their governments and heavily protected from competition. since then  open skies agreements have resulted in increased competition and choice for consumers  coupled with falling prices for airlines. the combination of high fuel prices  low fares  high salaries  and crises such as the september 11  2001 attacks and the sars epidemic have driven many older airlines to government-bailouts  bankruptcy or mergers. at the same time  low-cost carriers such as ryanair  southwest and westjet have flourished.   ==== general aviation ====  general aviation includes all non-scheduled civil flying 
both private and commercial. general aviation may include business flights  air charter  private aviation  flight training  ballooning  parachuting  gliding  hang gliding  aerial photography  foot-launched powered hang gliders  air ambulance  crop dusting  charter flights  traffic reporting  police air patrols and forest fire fighting. each country regulates aviation differently  but general aviation usually falls under different regulations depending on whether it is private or commercial and on the type of equipment involved. many small aircraft manufacturers serve the general aviation market  with a focus on private aviation and flight training. the most important recent developments for small aircraft (which form the bulk of the ga fleet) have been the introduction of advanced avionics (including gps) that were formerly found only in large airliners  and the introduction of composite materials to make small aircraft lighter and faster. ultralight and homebuilt aircraft have also become increasingly popular for recreational use  since in most countries that allow private aviation  they are much less expensive and less heavily regulated than certified aircraft.   === military aviation ===  simple balloons were used as surveillance aircraft as early as the 18th century. over the years  military aircraft have been built to meet ever increasing capability requirements. manufacturers of military aircraft compete for contracts to supply their government s arsenal. aircraft are selected based on factors like cost  performance  and the speed of production.   ==== types of military aviation ==== fighter aircraft s primary function is to destroy other aircraft. (e.g. sopwith camel  a6m zero  f-15  mig-29  su-27  and f-22). ground attack aircraft are used against tactical earth-bound targets. (e.g. junkers stuka  a-10  il-2  j-22 orao  ah-64 and su-25). bombers are generally used against more strategic targets  such as factories and oil fields. (e.g. zeppelin  tu-95  mirage iv  and b-52). transport aircraft are used to transport hardware and personnel. (e.g. c-17 globemaster iii  c-130 hercules and mil mi-26). surveillance and reconnaissance aircraft obtain information about enemy forces. (e.g. rumpler taube  mosquito  u-2  oh-58 and mig-25r). unmanned aerial vehicles (uavs) are used primarily as reconnaissance fixed-wing aircraft  though many also carry payloads. cargo aircraft are in development.  (e.g. rq-7b shadow  mq-8 fire scout  and mq-1c gray eagle). missiles deliver warheads  normally explosives  but also things like leaflets.   === air safety ===  aviation safety means the state of an aviation system or organization in which risks associated with aviation activities  related to  or in direct support of the operation of aircraft  are reduced and controlled to an acceptable level. it encompasses the theory  practice  investigation  and categorization of flight failures  and the prevention of such failures through regulation  education  and training. it can also be applied in the context of campaigns that inform the public as to the safety of air travel.
  == aviation accidents and incidents ==  an aviation accident is defined by the convention on international civil aviation annex 13 as an occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft which takes place between the time any person boards the aircraft with the intention of flight until such time as all such persons have disembarked  in which a person is fatally or seriously injured  the aircraft sustains damage or structural failure or the aircraft is missing or is completely inaccessible.the first fatal aviation accident occurred in a wright model a aircraft at fort myer  virginia  usa  on september 17  1908  resulting in injury to the pilot  orville wright  and death of the passenger  signal corps lieutenant thomas selfridge.an aviation incident is defined as an occurrence  other than an accident  associated with the operation of an aircraft that affects or could affect the safety of operations.an accident in which the damage to the aircraft is such that it must be written off  or in which the plane is destroyed  is called a hull loss accident.   == air traffic control ==  air traffic control (atc) involves communication with aircraft to help maintain separation – that is  they ensure that aircraft are sufficiently far enough apart horizontally or vertically for no risk of collision. controllers may co-ordinate position reports provided by pilots  or in high traffic areas (such as the united states) they may use radar to see aircraft positions. there are generally four different types of atc   center controllers  who control aircraft en route between airports control towers (including tower  ground control  clearance delivery  and other services)  which control aircraft within a small distance (typically 10–15 km horizontal  and 1 000 m vertical) of an airport. oceanic controllers  who control aircraft over international waters between continents  generally without radar service. terminal controllers  who control aircraft in a wider area (typically 50–80 km) around busy airports.atc is especially important for aircraft flying under instrument flight rules (ifr)  when they may be in weather conditions that do not allow the pilots to see other aircraft. however  in very high-traffic areas  especially near major airports  aircraft flying under visual flight rules (vfr) are also required to follow instructions from atc. in addition to separation from other aircraft  atc may provide weather advisories  terrain separation  navigation assistance  and other services to pilots  depending on their workload. atc do not control all flights. the majority of vfr (visual flight rules) flights in north america are not required to contact atc (unless they are passing through a busy terminal area or using a major airport)  and in many areas  such as northern canada and low altitude in northern scotland  air traffic control services are not available even for ifr flights at lower altitudes.   == environmental impact ==  like all activities involving combustion
 operating powered aircraft (from airliners to hot air balloons) releases soot and other pollutants into the atmosphere. greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (co2) are also produced. in addition  there are environmental impacts specific to aviation  for instance   aircraft operating at high altitudes near the tropopause (mainly large jet airliners) emit aerosols and leave contrails  both of which can increase cirrus cloud formation – cloud cover may have increased by up to 0.2% since the birth of aviation. clouds can have both a cooling and warming effect. they reflect some of the sun s rays back into space  but also block some of the heat radiated by earth s surface. on average  both thin natural cirrus clouds and contrails have a net warming effect. aircraft operating at high altitudes near the tropopause can also release chemicals that interact with greenhouse gases at those altitudes  particularly nitrogen compounds  which interact with ozone  increasing ozone concentrations. most light piston aircraft burn avgas  which contains tetraethyllead (tel). some lower-compression piston engines can operate on unleaded mogas  and turbine engines and diesel engines – neither of which require lead – are appearing on some newer light aircraft.another environmental impact of aviation is noise pollution  mainly caused by aircraft taking off and landing.   == see also ==  aeronautics environmental impact of aviation index of aviation articles timeline of aviation   == notes ==   == bibliography == berliner  don (1996). aviation  reaching for the sky. the oliver press  inc. isbn 1-881508-33-1. cassard  jean-christophe (2008). dictionnaire d histoire de bretagne (in french). morlaix  skol vreizh. isbn 978-2-915623-45-1. de angelis  gina (2001). the hindenburg. philadelphia  chelsea house publishers. isbn 0-7910-5272-9.   == external links ==   flying travel guide from wikivoyage  media related to aviation at wikimedia commons  learning materials related to aviation at wikiversity  the dictionary definition of aviation at wiktionary aviation  aerospace  and aeronautical terms
an aircraft pilot or aviator is a person who controls the flight of an aircraft by operating its directional flight controls. some other aircrew members  such as navigators or flight engineers  are also considered aviators  because they are involved in operating the aircraft s navigation and engine systems. other aircrew members  such as flight attendants  mechanics and ground crew  are not classified as aviators. in recognition of the pilots  qualifications and responsibilities  most militaries and many airlines worldwide award aviator badges to their pilots.   == history ==  the first recorded use of the term aviator (aviateur in french) was in 1887  as a variation of  aviation  from the latin avis (meaning bird)  coined in 1863 by g. de la landelle in aviation ou navigation aérienne ( aviation or air navigation ). the term aviatrix (aviatrice in french)  now archaic  was formerly used for a female aviator. these terms were used more in the early days of aviation  when airplanes were extremely rare  and connoted bravery and adventure. for example  a 1905 reference work described the wright brothers  first airplane   the weight  including the body of the aviator  is a little more than 700 pounds .to ensure the safety of people in the air and on the ground  early aviation soon required that aircraft be under the operational control of a properly trained  certified pilot at all times  who is responsible for the safe and legal completion of the flight. the  aéro-club de france delivered the first certificate to louis blériot in 1908—followed by glenn curtiss  léon delagrange  and robert esnault-pelterie. the british royal aero club followed in 1910 and the aero club of america in 1911 (glenn curtiss receiving the first).   == civilian ==  civilian pilots fly aircraft of all types privately for pleasure  charity  or in pursuance of a business  or commercially for non-scheduled (charter) and scheduled passenger and cargo air carriers (airlines)  corporate aviation  agriculture (crop dusting  etc.)  forest fire control  law enforcement  etc. when flying for an airline  pilots are usually referred to as airline pilots  with the pilot in command often referred to as the captain.   === airline === there were 290 000 airline pilots in the world in 2017 and aircraft simulator manufacturer cae inc. forecasts a need for 255 000 new ones for a population of 440 000 by 2027  150 000 for growth and 105 000 to offset retirement and attrition   90 000 in asia-pacific (average pilot age in 2016  45.8 years)  85 000 in americas (48 years)  50 000 in europe (43.7 years) and 30 000 in middle east & africa (45.7 years).boeing expects 790 000 new pilots in 20 years from 2018  635 000 for commercial aviation  96 000 for business aviation and 59 000 for helicopters 
33% in asia pacific (261 000)  26% in north america (206 000)  18% in europe (146 000)  8% in the middle east (64 000)  7% in latin america (57 000)  4% in africa (29 000) and 3% in russia/ central asia (27 000).by november 2017  due a shortage of qualified pilots  some pilots were leaving corporate aviation to return to airlines. in one example a global 6000 pilot  making $250 000 a year for 10 to 15 flight hours a month  returned to american airlines with full seniority. a gulfstream g650 or global 6000 pilot might earn between $245 000 and $265 000  and recruiting one may require up to $300 000. at the other end of the spectrum  constrained by the available pilots  some small carriers hire new pilots who need 300 hours to jump to airlines in a year. they may also recruit non-career pilots who have other jobs or airline retirees who want to continue to fly.   ==== automation ==== the number of airline pilots could decrease as automation replaces copilots and eventually pilots as well. in january 2017 rhett ross  ceo of continental motors said  my concern is that in the next two decades—if not sooner—automated and autonomous flight will have developed sufficiently to put downward pressure on both wages and the number and kind of flying jobs available. so if a kid asks the question now and he or she is 18  20 years from now will be 2037 and our would-be careerist will be 38—not even mid-career. who among us thinks aviation and especially for-hire flying will look like it does now  christian dries  owner of diamond aircraft austria said  behind the curtain  aircraft manufacturers are working on a single-pilot cockpit where the airplane can be controlled from the ground and only in case of malfunction does the pilot of the plane interfere. basically the flight will be autonomous and i expect this to happen in the next five to six years for freighters. in august 2017 financial company ubs predicted pilotless airliners are technically feasible and could appear around 2025  offering around $35bn of savings  mainly in pilot costs  $26bn for airlines  $3bn for business jets and $2.1bn for civil helicopters  $3bn/year from lower pilot training and aviation insurance costs due to safer flights  $1bn from flight optimisation (1% of global airlines  $133bn jet fuel bill in 2016)  not counting revenue opportunity from increased capacity utilization. regulations have to adapt with air cargo likely at the forefront  but pilotless flights could be limited by consumer behaviour  54% of 8 000 people surveyed are defiant while 17% are supportive  with acceptation progressively forecast.avweb reporter geoff rapoport stated   pilotless aircraft are an appealing prospect for airlines bracing for the need to hire several hundred thousand new pilots in the next decade. wages and training costs have been rapidly rising at regional u.s. airlines
over the last several years as the major airlines have hired pilots from the regionals at unprecedented rates to cover increased air travel demand from economic expansion and a wave of retirements .going to pilotless airliners could be done in one bold step or in gradual improvements like by reducing the cockpit crew for long haul missions or allowing single pilot cargo aircraft. the industry has not decided how to proceed yet. present automated systems are not autonomous and must be monitored  their replacement could require artificial intelligence with machine learning while present certified software is deterministic.single-pilot freighters could start with regional flights. the air line pilots association believe removing pilots would threaten aviation safety and opposes the april 2018 faa reauthorization act s section 744 establishing a research and development program to assist single-pilot cargo aircraft by remote and computer piloting.for french aerospace research center onera and avionics manufacturer thales  artificial intelligence (ai) like consumer neural networks learning from large datasets cannot explain their operation and cannot be certified for safe air transport. progress towards ‘explainable’ ais can be expected in the next decade  as the onera expects “leads” for a certifiable ai system  along easa standards evolution.   === africa and asia === in some countries  such as pakistan  thailand and several african nations  there is a strong relationship between the military and the principal national airlines  and many airline pilots come from the military  however  that is no longer the case in the united states and western europe. while the flight decks of u.s. and european airliners do have ex-military pilots  many pilots are civilians. military training and flying  while rigorous  is fundamentally different in many ways from civilian piloting.   === canada === operating an aircraft in canada is regulated by the aeronautics act of 1985 and the canadian aviation regulations provide rules for pilot licensing in canada. retirement age is provided by each airline with some set to age 60  but changes to the canadian human rights act have restricted retirement age set by the airlines.   === united states === in the united states in 2018  there were 633 317 active pilots. this was down from a high of over 800 000 active pilots in 1980.in 1930  the air commerce act established pilot licensing requirements for american civil aviation. commercial airline pilots in the united states have a mandatory retirement age of 65  having increased from age 60 in 2007.   == military ==  military pilots fly with the armed forces  primarily the air forces  of a government or nation-state. their tasks involve combat and non-combat operations  including direct hostile engagements and support operations. military pilots undergo specialized training  often with weapons. examples of military pilots include fighter pilots  bomber pilots  transport pilots  test pilots and astronauts. military pilots are trained with a different syllabus than civilian pilots  which is delivered by military instructors. this is
due to the different aircraft  flight goals  flight situations and chains of responsibility. many military pilots do transfer to civilian-pilot qualification after they leave the military  and typically their military experience provides the basis for a civilian pilot s license.   == unmanned aerial vehicles ==  unmanned aerial vehicles (uavs  also known as  drones ) operate without a pilot on-board and are classed into two categories  autonomous aircraft that operate without active human control during flight and remotely piloted uavs which are operated remotely by one or more persons. the person controlling a remotely piloted uav may be referred to as its pilot or operator. depending on the sophistication and use of the uav  pilots/operators of uavs may require certification or training  but are generally not subject to the licensing/certification requirements of pilots of manned aircraft. most jurisdictions have restrictions on the use of uavs which have greatly limited their use in controlled airspace  uavs have mostly been limited to military and hobbyist use. in the united states  use of uavs is very limited in controlled airspace (generally  above 400 ft/122m and away from airports) and the faa prohibits nearly all commercial use. once regulations are made to allow expanded use of uavs in controlled airspace  there is expected to be a large surge of uavs in use and  consequently  high demand for pilots/operators of these aircraft.   == space ==  the general concept of an airplane pilot can be applied to human spaceflight  as well. the spacecraft pilot is the astronaut who directly controls the operation of a spacecraft. this term derives directly from the usage of the word  pilot  in aviation  where it is synonymous with  aviator .   == pilot certifications ==  pilots are required to go through many hours of flight training and theoretical study  that differ depending on the country. the first step is acquiring the private pilot license (ppl)  or private pilot certificate.  this takes at least 40 hours of flight time with a certified flight instructor (cfi). in the united states  an lsa (light sport aircraft) license can be obtained in at least 20 hours of flight time. the next step in a pilot s progression is either instrument rating (ir)  or multi-engine rating (mep) endorsements. if a professional career or professional-level skills are desired  a commercial pilot license (cpl) endorsement would also be required. to captain an airliner  one must obtain an airline transport pilot license (atpl). after 1 august 2013  even when being a first officer (fo)  an atpl is required.some countries/carriers require/use a multi crew coordination (mcc).   == see also == aircrew (flight crew) airline pilot uniforms air safety imsafe (mnemonic for pilot s fitness to fly) list of aerospace engineers list of aviators list of russian aviators pilot fatigue pilot in command pilot logbook test pilot   == references ==   == external
links ==  media related to aviators at wikimedia commons u.s. women pilots statistics 1960–2010 pope  stephen (october 12  2019).  ai  autonomy  and airpower  the end of pilots . defence studies.
a butcher is a person who may slaughter animals  dress their flesh  sell their meat  or participate within any combination of these three tasks. they may prepare standard cuts of meat and poultry for sale in retail or wholesale food establishments. a butcher may be employed by supermarkets  grocery stores  butcher shops and fish markets  slaughter houses  or may be self-employed.butchery is an ancient trade  whose duties may date back to the domestication of livestock  its practitioners formed guilds in england as far back as 1272. today  many jurisdictions offer trade certifications for butchers. trade qualification is earned through a three to four year apprenticeship although some training organisations qualify their students sooner  depending on their competency. in some countries  once a butcher is trade qualified  they can learn to become a master butcher (fleishmaster) .   == duties ==  butchery is a traditional line of work. in the industrialized world  slaughterhouses use butchers to slaughter the animals  performing one or a few of the steps repeatedly as specialists on a semi automated disassembly line. the steps include stunning (rendering the animal incapacitated)  exsanguination (severing the carotid or brachial arteries to facilitate blood removal)  skinning (removing the hide or pelt) or scalding and dehairing (pork)  evisceration (removing the viscera) and splitting (dividing the carcass in half longitudinally). after the carcasses are chilled (unless  hot-boned )  primary butchery consists of selecting carcasses  sides  or quarters from which primal cuts can be produced with the minimum of wastage  separating the primal cuts from the carcass  trimming primal cuts and preparing them for secondary butchery or sale  and storing cut meats. secondary butchery involves boning  trimming and value-adding of primal cuts  in preparation for sale. historically  primary and secondary butchery were performed in the same establishment  but the advent of methods of preservation (vacuum packing) and low cost transportation has largely separated them. in parts of the world  it is common for butchers to perform many or all of the butcher s duties. where refrigeration is less common  these skills are required to sell the meat of slaughtered animals.   == butcher shop ==  some butchers sell their goods in specialized stores  commonly termed a butcher shop (american english)  butchery (south african english) or butcher s shop (british english). butchers at a butcher shop may perform primary butchery  but will typically perform secondary butchery to prepare fresh cuts of meat for sale. these shops may also sell related products  such as hot food (using their own meat products)  food preparation supplies  baked goods and grocery items. butcher shops can have a wider variety of animal types  meat cuts and quality of cuts. additionally  butcher shops may focus on a particular culture  or nationality  of meat production. some butcher shops  termed  meat delis  may also include a delicatessen.
in the united states and canada  butcher shops have become less common because of the increasing popularity of supermarkets and warehouse clubs. many remaining ones are aimed at hispanic and other immigrants or  more recently  those looking for organic offerings. supermarkets employ butchers for secondary butchery  but in the united states even that role is diminished with the advent of  case-ready  meat  where the product is packaged for retail sale at the packinghouse or specialized central processing plants. buying meat from the butcher shops in canada is always synonymous with better meat quality and often cheapest price than at the supermarket.   == primal cut ==  a primal cut is a piece of meat initially separated from the carcass during butchering. different countries and cultures make these cuts in different ways  and primal cuts also differ between type of carcass. the british  american and french primal cuts all differ in some respects. a notable example is fatback  which in europe is an important primal cut of pork  but in north america is regarded as trimmings to be used in sausage or rendered into lard. the primal cuts may be sold complete or cut further. (the quite distinct term  prime cut  is sometimes used to describe cuts considered to be of better quality  for example the usda uses a beef grading system ranging from  prime  to  canner .) three examples of  prime cuts  are sirloin (porterhouse)  eye fillet (tenderloin)  rib fillet (cube roll).   == metaphorical use == see also butcher (disambiguation)in various periods and cultures  the term  butcher  has been applied to people who act cruelly to other human beings or slaughter them. for example  pompey  a prominent roman general and politician of the first century bc  got the latin nickname adulescentulus carnifex  translated as  the teenage butcher  or  the butcher boy  due to brutal treatment of political opponents in the early part of his career.   == see also == charcuterie dario cecchini meat cutter qassab qureshi sausage making victualler butcher knife   == references ==   == further reading ==  slovak pig slaughter  butchering  and traditional sausage making - article in english with detailed pictures of slovak family following traditional procedures
a journalist is a person who collects  writes  or distributes news or other current information to the public. a journalist s work is called journalism. a journalist can work with general issues or specialize in certain issues. however  most journalists tend to specialize  and by cooperating with other journalists  produce journals that span many topics. for example  a sports journalist covers news within the world of sports  but this journalist may be a part of a newspaper that covers many different topics.   == roles == a reporter is a type of journalist who researches  writes  and reports on information in order to present in sources  conduct interviews  engage in research  and make reports. the information-gathering part of a journalist s job is sometimes called reporting  in contrast to the production part of the job such as writing articles. reporters may split their time between working in a newsroom and going out to witness events or interviewing people. reporters may be assigned a specific beat or area of coverage. depending on the context  the term journalist may include various types of editors  editorial writers  columnists  and visual journalists  such as photojournalists (journalists who use the medium of photography). journalism has developed a variety of ethics and standards.  while objectivity and a lack of bias are of primary concern and importance  more liberal types of journalism  such as advocacy journalism and activism  intentionally adopt a non-objective viewpoint.  this has become more prevalent with the advent of social media and blogs  as well as other platforms that are used to manipulate or sway social and political opinions and policies.  these platforms often project extreme bias  as  sources  are not always held accountable or considered necessary in order to produce a written  televised  or otherwise  published  end product.  matthew c. nisbet  who has written on science communication  has defined a  knowledge journalist  as a public intellectual who  like walter lippmann  david brooks  fareed zakaria  naomi klein  michael pollan  thomas friedman  and andrew revkin  sees their role as researching complicated issues of fact or science which most laymen would not have the time or access to information to research themselves  then communicating an accurate and understandable version to the public as a teacher and policy advisor.in his best-known books  public opinion (1922) and the phantom public (1925)  lippmann argued that most individuals lacked the capacity  time  and motivation to follow and analyze news of the many complex policy questions that troubled society. nor did they often directly experience most social problems  or have direct access to expert insights. these limitations were made worse by a news media that tended to over-simplify issues and to reinforce stereotypes  partisan viewpoints  and prejudices. as a consequence  lippmann believed that the public needed journalists like
himself who could serve as expert analysts  guiding “citizens to a deeper understanding of what was really important.” in 2018  the united states department of labor s occupational outlook handbook reported that employment for the category   reporters  correspondents and broadcast news analysts  will decline 9 percent between 2016 and 2026.   == journalistic freedom == journalists sometimes expose themselves to danger  particularly when reporting in areas of armed conflict or in states that do not respect the freedom of the press. organizations such as the committee to protect journalists and reporters without borders publish reports on press freedom and advocate for journalistic freedom. as of november 2011  the committee to protect journalists reports that 887 journalists have been killed worldwide since 1992 by murder (71%)  crossfire or combat (17%)  or on dangerous assignment (11%). the  ten deadliest countries  for journalists since 1992 have been iraq (230 deaths)  philippines (109)  russia (77)  colombia (76)  mexico (69)  algeria (61)  pakistan (59)  india (49)  somalia (45)  brazil (31) and sri lanka (30).the committee to protect journalists also reports that as of december 1  2010  145 journalists were jailed worldwide for journalistic activities. current numbers are even higher. the ten countries with the largest number of currently-imprisoned journalists are turkey (95)  china (34)  iran (34)  eritrea (17)  burma (13)  uzbekistan (6)  vietnam (5)  cuba (4)  ethiopia (4)  and sudan (3).apart from physical harm  journalists are harmed psychologically. this applies especially to war reporters  but their editorial offices at home often do not know how to deal appropriately with the reporters they expose to danger. hence  a systematic and sustainable way of psychological support for traumatized journalists is strongly needed. however  only little and fragmented support programs exist so far.the newseum in washington  d.c. is home to the journalists memorial  which lists the names of over 2 100 journalists from around the world who were killed in the line of duty.   == journalist and source relationship == the relationship between a professional journalist and a source can be rather complex  and a source can sometimes impact the direction of the article written by the journalist. the article  a compromised fourth estate  uses herbert gans  metaphor to capture their relationship. he uses a dance metaphor  the tango  to illustrate the co-operative nature of their interactions  it takes two to tango . herbert suggests that the source often leads but journalists commonly object to this notion for two reasons   it signals source supremacy in news making. it offends journalists’ professional culture  which emphasizes independence and editorial autonomy.this dance metaphor helps showcase consensus within the relationship but the article fully describes the common relation between the two  a relationship with sources that is too cozy is potentially compromising of journalists’ integrity and risks becoming collusive. journalists have typically
favored a more robust  conflict model  based on a crucial assumption that if the media are to function as watchdogs of powerful economic and political interests  journalists must establish their independence of sources or risk the fourth estate being driven by the fifth estate of public relations .   == the worst year on record for journalists ==  according to reporters without borders  annual report  the year 2018 was the worst year on record for deadly violence and abuse toward journalists  there was a 15 per cent increase in such killings since 2017. ruben pat was gunned down outside a mexican beach bar. yaser murtaja was shot by an israeli army sniper. bulgarian viktoria marinova was beaten  raped and strangled. a car bomb killed malta s daphne caruana galizia. jamal khashoggi was killed inside saudi arabia s consulate in istanbul on oct 2.   == gallery ==                == see also ==   == references ==   == bibliography == fowler  nathaniel clark. (1913). the handbook of journalism  all about newspaper work.--facts and information of vital moment to the journalist and to all who would enter this calling. new york  sully and kleinteich. huffman  james l. (2003). a yankee in meiji japan  the crusading journalist. lanham  maryland  rowman & littlefield. isbn 978-0-7425-2621-1 randall  david. (2000). the universal journalist. sterling virginia  pluto press. isbn 978-0-7453-1641-3  oclc 43481682 stone  ejijah melville. (1921) fifty years a journalist. new york  doubleday  page and company. oclc 1520155 woods  donald. (1981). asking for trouble  autobiography of a banned journalist. new york  atheneum. isbn 978-0-689-11159-4  oclc 6864121   == external links ==  media related to journalists at wikimedia commons  society of professional journalists
a columnist is a person who writes for publication in a series  creating an article that usually offers commentary and opinions. columns appear in newspapers  magazines and other publications  including blogs. they take the form of a short essay by a specific writer who offers a personal point of view. in some instances  a column has been written by a composite or a team  appearing under a pseudonym  or (in effect) a brand name. some columnists appear on a daily or weekly basis and later reprint the same material in book collections.   == radio and television == newspaper columnists of the 1930s and 1940s  such as franklin pierce adams (also known as fpa)  nick kenny  john crosby  jimmie fidler  louella parsons  drew pearson  ed sullivan and walter winchell  achieved a celebrity status and used their syndicated columns as a springboard to move into radio and television. in some cases  such as winchell and parsons  their radio programs were quite similar in format to their newspaper columns. rona barrett began as a hollywood gossip columnist in 1957  duplicating her print tactics on television by the mid-1960s. one of the more famous syndicated columnists of the 1920s and 1930s  o. o. mcintyre  declined offers to do a radio series because he felt it would interfere and diminish the quality of writing in his column   new york day by day.    == books == franklin pierce adams and o. o. mcintyre both collected their columns into a series of books  as did other columnists. mcintyre s book  the big town  new york day by day (1935) was a bestseller. adams  the melancholy lute (1936) is a collection of selections from three decades of his columns. h. allen smith s first humor book  low man on a totem pole (1941)  and his two following books  were so popular during world war ii that they kept smith on the new york herald tribune s best seller list for 100 weeks and prompted a collection of all three in 3 smiths in the wind (1946). when smith s column  the totem pole  was syndicated by united features  he told time   just between you and me  it s tough. a typewriter can be a pretty formidable contraption when you sit down in front of it and say   all right  now i m going to be funny.  the writing of french humor columnist alain rémond has been collected in books. the miami herald promoted humor columnist dave barry with this description   dave barry has been at the miami herald since 1983. a pulitzer prize winner for commentary  he writes about issues ranging from the international economy to exploding toilets.  barry has collected his columns into a series of successful books. he stopped writing his nationally syndicated weekly column in 2005  and the miami
herald now offers on its website a lengthy selection of past columns by barry.in 1950  editor & publisher looked back at the newspaper columnists of the 1920s    feature service of various sorts is new  hallam walker davis wrote in a book  the column  which was published in 1926.  it has had the advantage of high-powered promotion. it is still riding on the crest of the first big wave its own splash sent out.  but mr. davis did think that in a decade or two the newspapers might be promoting their columns along with their comic strips. the world had started the ball rolling with billboard advertising of heywood broun s  it seems to me.  the mcnaught syndicate was sitting pretty with o. o. mcintyre  will rogers and irvin s. cobb on its list. the new york herald tribune offered don marquis and franklin p. adams rhymed satirically in  the conning tower  for the new york world syndicate.  a line o  type or two  bert leston taylor s verse column in the chicago tribune  was now being done by richard henry little. other offerings  humorous sketches by damon runyon  o. henry stories  editorials by arthur brisbane  ring lardner letter   rippling rhymes  by walt mason  literary articles by h. l. mencken.   == newspaper and magazine ==  in at least one situation  a column expanded to become an entire successful magazine. when cyrus curtis founded the tribune and farmer in 1879  it was a four-page weekly with an annual subscription rate of 50 cents. he introduced a women s column by his wife  louise knapp curtis  and it proved so popular that in 1883  he decided to publish it as a separate monthly supplement  ladies journal and practical housekeeper  edited by louise curtis. with 25 000 subscribers by the end of its first year  it was such a success that curtis sold tribune and farmer to put his energy into the new publication  which became the ladies  home journal.   == types == advice columnist critic editorial opinion columnist gossip columnist humor columnist food columnist   == see also == list of newspaper columnists list of syndicated columnists food columnists of note   == references ==   == external links == national society of newspaper columnists
an architect is a person who plans  designs and reviews the construction of buildings.  to practice architecture means to provide services in connection with the design of buildings and the space within the site surrounding the buildings that have human occupancy or use as their principal purpose. etymologically  architect derives from the latin architectus  which derives from the greek (arkhi-  chief + tekton  builder)  i.e.  chief builder.professionally  an architect s decisions affect public safety  and thus an architect must undergo specialized training consisting of advanced education and a practicum (or internship) for practical experience to earn a license to practice architecture. practical  technical  and academic requirements for becoming an architect vary by jurisdiction.   == origins ==  throughout ancient and medieval history  most of the architectural design and construction was carried out by artisans—such as stone masons and carpenters  rising to the role of master builder. until modern times  there was no clear distinction between architect and engineer. in europe  the titles architect and engineer were primarily geographical variations that referred to the same person  often used interchangeably.it is suggested that various developments in technology and mathematics allowed the development of the professional  gentleman  architect  separate from the hands-on craftsman. paper was not used in europe for drawing until the 15th century but became increasingly available after 1500. pencils were used more often for drawing by 1600. the availability of both allowed pre-construction drawings to be made by professionals. concurrently  the introduction of linear perspective and innovations such as the use of different projections to describe a three-dimensional building in two dimensions  together with an increased understanding of dimensional accuracy  helped building designers communicate their ideas. however  the development was gradual. until the 18th-century  buildings continued to be designed and set out by craftsmen with the exception of high-status projects.   == architecture == in most developed countries  only those qualified with an appropriate license  certification or registration with a relevant body (often governmental) may legally practice architecture. such licensure usually requires a university degree  successful completion of exams  as well as a training period. representation of oneself as an architect through the use of terms and titles is restricted to licensed individuals by law  although in general  derivatives such as architectural designer are often not legally protected. to practice architecture implies the ability to practice independently of supervision. the term building design professional (or design professional)  by contrast  is a much broader term that includes professionals who practice independently under an alternate profession  such as engineering professionals  or those who assist in the practice of architecture under the supervision of a licensed architect such as intern architects. in many places  independent  non-licensed individuals may perform design services outside the professional restrictions  such design houses and other smaller structures.   == practice == in the architectural profession  technical and
environmental knowledge  design and construction management  and an understanding of business are as important as design. however  the design is the driving force throughout the project and beyond. an architect accepts a commission from a client. the commission might involve preparing feasibility reports  building audits  the design of a building or of several buildings  structures  and the spaces among them. the architect participates in developing the requirements the client wants in the building. throughout the project (planning to occupancy)  the architect coordinates a design team. structural  mechanical  and electrical engineers and other specialists  are hired by the client or the architect  who must ensure that the work is coordinated to construct the design.   === design role === the architect  once hired by a client  is responsible for creating a design concept that both meets the requirements of that client and provides a facility suitable to the required use. the architect must meet with  and question  the client in order to ascertain all the requirements (and nuances) of the planned project. often the full brief is not entirely clear at the beginning  entailing a degree of risk in the design undertaking. the architect may make early proposals to the client  which may rework the very terms of the brief. the  program  (or brief) is essential to producing a project that meets all the needs of the owner. this then is a guide for the architect in creating the design concept. design proposal(s) are generally expected to be both imaginative and pragmatic. depending on the place  time  finance  culture  and available crafts and technology in which the design takes place   the precise extent and nature of these expectations will vary. foresight is a prerequisite as designing buildings is a very complex and demanding undertaking.  any design concept must at a very early stage in its generation take into account a great number of issues and variables which include qualities of space(s)  the end-use and life-cycle of these proposed spaces  connections  relations  and aspects between spaces including how they are put together as well as the impact of proposals on the immediate and wider locality. selection of appropriate materials and technology must be considered  tested and reviewed at an early stage in the design to ensure there are no setbacks (such as higher-than-expected costs) which may occur later. the site and its environs  as well as the culture and history of the place  will also influence the design. the design must also countenance increasing concerns with environmental sustainability. the architect may introduce (intentionally or not)  to greater or lesser degrees  aspects of mathematics and architecture  new or current architectural theory  or references to architectural history. a key part of the design is that the architect often consults with engineers  surveyors and other specialists throughout the design  ensuring that aspects such as the structural
supports and air conditioning elements are coordinated in the scheme as a whole. the control and planning of construction costs are also a part of these consultations. coordination of the different aspects involves a high degree of specialized communication  including advanced computer technology such as bim (building information modeling)  cad  and cloud-based technologies. at all times in the design  the architect reports back to the client who may have reservations or recommendations  introducing a further variable into the design. architects deal with local and federal jurisdictions about regulations and building codes. the architect might need to comply with local planning and zoning laws  such as required setbacks  height limitations  parking requirements  transparency requirements (windows)  and land use. some established jurisdictions require adherence to design and historic preservation guidelines. health and safety risks form a vital part of the current design  and in many jurisdictions  design reports and records are required which include ongoing considerations such as materials and contaminants  waste management and recycling  traffic control and fire safety.   ==== means of design ==== previously  architects employed drawings to illustrate and generate design proposals. while conceptual sketches are still widely used by architects  computer technology has now become the industry standard. however  design may include the use of photos  collages  prints  linocuts  3d scanning technology and other media in design production.  increasingly  computer software such as bim is shaping how architects work. bim technology allows for the creation of a virtual building that serves as an information database for the sharing of design and building information throughout the life-cycle of the building s design  construction and maintenance.   === environmental role === as current buildings are now known to be high emitters of carbon into the atmosphere  increasing controls are being placed on buildings and associated technology to reduce emissions  increase energy efficiency  and make use of renewable energy sources. renewable energy sources may be developed within the proposed building or via local or national renewable energy providers. as a result  the architect is required to remain abreast of current regulations which are continually tightening. some new developments exhibit extremely low energy use. however  the architect is also increasingly required to provide initiatives in a wider environmental sense  such as making provision for low-energy transport  natural daylighting instead of artificial lighting  natural ventilation instead of air conditioning  pollution  and waste management  use of recycled materials and employment of materials which can be easily recycled in the future.   === construction role === as the design becomes more advanced and detailed  specifications and detail designs are made of all the elements and components of the building. techniques in the production of a building are continually advancing which places a demand on the architect to ensure that he or she remains up to date with these advances. depending on the client s needs and the
jurisdiction s requirements  the spectrum of the architect s services during construction stages may be extensive (detailed document preparation and construction review) or less involved (such as allowing a contractor to exercise considerable design-build functions). architects typically put projects to tender on behalf of their clients  advise on the award of the project to a general contractor  facilitate and then administer a contract of agreement which is often between the client and the contractor. this contract is legally binding and covers a very wide range of aspects including the insurances and commitments of all stakeholders  the status of the design documents  provisions for the architect s access  and procedures for the control of the works as they proceed. depending on the type of contract utilized  provisions for further sub-contract tenders may be required. the architect may require that some elements are covered by a warranty which specifies the expected life and other aspects of the material  product or work. in most jurisdictions  prior notification to the relevant local authority must be given before commencement on site  thus giving the local authority notice to carry out independent inspections. the architect will then review and inspect the progress of the work in coordination with the local authority. the architect will typically review contractor shop drawings and other submittals  prepare and issue site instructions  and provide certificates for payment to the contractor (see also design-bid-build) which is based on the work done to date as well as any materials and other goods purchased or hired. in the united kingdom and other countries  a quantity surveyor is often part of the team to provide cost consulting. with very large  complex projects  an independent construction manager is sometimes hired to assist in the design and to manage construction. in many jurisdictions  mandatory certification or assurance of the completed work or part of works is required. this demand for certification entails a high degree of risk - therefore  regular inspections of the work as it progresses on site is required to ensure that is in compliance with the design itself as well as with all relevant statutes and permissions.   === alternate practice and specializations === recent decades have seen the rise of specializations within the profession. many architects and architectural firms focus on certain project types (for example  healthcare  retail  public housing  event management)  technological expertise or project delivery methods. some architects specialize as building code  building envelope  sustainable design  technical writing  historic preservation(us) or conservation (uk)  accessibility and other forms of specialist consultants. many architects elect to move into real estate (property) development  corporate facilities planning  project management  construction management  interior design  city planning  or other related fields.   == professional requirements ==  although there are variations from place to place  most of the world s architects are required to register with the appropriate jurisdiction. to do so 
architects are typically required to meet three common requirements  education  experience  and examination. educational requirements generally consist of a university degree in architecture. the experience requirement for degree candidates is usually satisfied by a practicum or internship (usually two to three years  depending on jurisdiction). finally  a registration examination or a series of exams is required prior to licensure. professionals engaged in the design and supervision of construction projects prior to the late 19th century were not necessarily trained in a separate architecture program in an academic setting. instead  they often trained under established architects. prior to modern times  there was no distinction between architects  engineers and often artists  and the title used varied depending on geographical location. they often carried the title of master builder or surveyor after serving a number of years as an apprentice (such as sir christopher wren). the formal study of architecture in academic institutions played a pivotal role in the development of the profession as a whole  serving as a focal point for advances in architectural technology and theory.   == fees == architects  fee structures are typically based on a percentage of construction value  as a rate per unit area of the proposed construction  hourly rates or a fixed lump sum fee. combinations of these structures are also common. fixed fees are usually based on a project s allocated construction cost and can range between 4 and 12% of new construction cost  for commercial and institutional projects  depending on a project s size and complexity. residential projects range from 12 to 20%. renovation projects typically command higher percentages  as high as 15-20%. overall billings for architectural firms range widely  depending on location and economic climate. billings have traditionally been dependent on the local economic conditions but  with rapid globalization  this is becoming less of a factor for larger international firms. salaries also vary  depending on experience  position within the firm (staff architect  partner  or shareholder  etc.)  and the size and location of the firm.   == professional organizations ==  a number of national professional organizations exist to promote career and business development in architecture. the international union of architects (uia) the american institute of architects (aia) usa royal institute of british architects (riba) uk architects registration board (arb) uk the australian institute of architects (aia)   australia the south african institute of architects (saia) south africa association of licensed architects (ala)    usa   == prizes  awards  and titles ==  a wide variety of prizes is awarded by national professional associations and other bodies  recognizing accomplished architects  their buildings  structures  and professional careers. the most lucrative award an architect can receive is the pritzker prize  sometimes termed the  nobel prize for architecture.  other prestigious architectural awards are the royal gold medal  the aia gold medal (usa)  aia gold medal (australia) 
and the praemium imperiale. architects in the uk  who have made contributions to the profession through design excellence or architectural education  or have in some other way advanced the profession  might until 1971 be elected fellows of the royal institute of british architects and can write friba after their name if they feel so inclined. those elected to chartered membership of the riba after 1971 may use the initials riba but cannot use the old ariba and friba. an honorary fellow may use the initials hon. friba. and an international fellow may use the initials int. friba.  architects in the us  who have made contributions to the profession through design excellence or architectural education  or have in some other way advanced the profession  are elected fellows of the american institute of architects and can write faia after their name. architects in canada  who have made outstanding contributions to the profession through contribution to research  scholarship  public service  or professional standing to the good of architecture in canada  or elsewhere  may be recognized as a fellow of the royal architectural institute of canada and can write fraic after their name. in hong kong  those elected to chartered membership may use the initial hkia  and those who have made a special contribution after nomination and election by the hong kong institute of architects (hkia)  may be elected as fellow members of hkia and may use fhkia after their name. architects in the philippines and filipino communities overseas (whether they are filipinos or not)  especially those who also profess other jobs at the same time  are addressed and introduced as architect  rather than sir/madam in speech or mr./mrs./ms. (g./gng./bb. in filipino) before surnames. that word is used either in itself or before the given name or surname.   == see also ==   == references ==
a civil engineer is a person who practices civil engineering – the application of planning  designing  constructing  maintaining  and operating infrastructures while protecting the public and environmental health  as well as improving existing infrastructures that have been neglected. civil engineering is one of the oldest engineering disciplines because it deals with constructed environment including planning  designing  and overseeing construction and maintenance of building structures  and facilities  such as roads  railroads  airports  bridges  harbors  channels  dams  irrigation projects  pipelines  power plants  and water and sewage systems.the term  civil engineer  was established by john smeaton in 1750 to contrast engineers working on civil projects with the military engineers  who worked on armaments and defenses. over time  various sub-disciplines of civil engineering have become recognized and much of military engineering has been absorbed by civil engineering.  other engineering practices became recognized as independent engineering disciplines  including chemical engineering  mechanical engineering  and electrical engineering. in some places  a civil engineer may perform land surveying  in others  surveying is limited to construction surveying  unless an additional qualification is obtained.   == specialization == civil engineers usually practice in a particular specialty  such as construction engineering  geotechnical engineering  structural engineering  land development  transportation engineering  hydraulic engineering  and environmental engineering.  a civil engineer is concerned with determining the right design for these structures and looking after the construction process so that the longevity of these structures is guaranteed after completion. these structures should also be satisfactory for the public in terms of comfort.  some civil engineers  particularly those working for government agencies  may practice across multiple specializations  particularly when involved in critical infrastructure development or maintenance.   == work environment == civil engineers generally work in a variety of locations and conditions. much of a civil engineer s work is dealing with non-engineers or other from different technical disciplines  so training should give skills preparing future civil engineers in organizational relationships between parties to projects  cost and time. many spend time outdoors at construction sites so that they can monitor operations or solve problems onsite. the job is typically a blend of in-office and on-location work. most work full-time.   == education and licensing == in most countries  a civil engineer will have graduated from a post-secondary school with a degree in civil engineering  which requires a strong background in mathematics and the physical sciences  this degree is typically a bachelor s degree  though many civil engineers study further to obtain master s  engineer  doctoral and post doctoral degrees. in many countries  civil engineers are subject to licensure. in some jurisdictions with mandatory licensing  people who do not obtain a license may not call themselves  civil engineers .   === belgium === in belgium  civil engineer (abbreviated ir.) (french 
ingénieur civil  dutch  burgerlijk ingenieur) is a legally protected title applicable to graduates of the five-year engineering course of one of the six universities and the royal military academy. their speciality can be all fields of engineering  civil  structural  electrical  mechanical  chemical  physics and even computer science. this use of the title may cause confusion to the english speaker as the belgian  civil  engineer can have a speciality other than civil engineering. in fact  belgians use the adjective  civil  in the sense of  civilian  as opposed to military engineers. the formation of the civil engineer has a strong mathematical and scientific base and is more theoretical in approach than the practical oriented industrial engineer (ing.) educated in a five-year program at a polytechnic. traditionally  students were required to pass an entrance exam on mathematics to start civil engineering studies. this exam was abolished in 2004 for the flemish community  but is still organised in the french community.   === scandinavia === in scandinavian countries  civil engineer (civilingenjör (swedish)  sivilingeniør (norwegian)  civilingeniør (danish)) is a first professional degree  approximately equivalent to master of science in engineering  and a protected title granted to students by selected institutes of technology. as in english the word has its origin in the distinction between civilian and military engineers  as in before the start of the 19th century only military engineers existed and the prefix  civil  was a way to separate those who had studied engineering in a regular university from their military counterparts. today the degree spans over all fields within engineering  like civil engineering  mechanical engineering  computer science  electronics engineering  etc. there is generally a slight difference between a master of science in engineering degree and the scandinavian civil engineer degree  the latter s programme having closer ties with the industry s demands. a civil engineer is the most well-known of the two  still  the area of expertise remains obfuscated for most of the public. a noteworthy difference is the mandatory courses in mathematics and physics  regardless of the equivalent master s degree  e.g. computer science. although a  college engineer  (högskoleingenjör  diplomingenjör/mellaningenjör (swedish)  høgskoleingeniør (norwegian)  diplomingeniør (danish)) is roughly equivalent to a bachelor of science in scandinavia  to become a  civil engineer  one often has had to do up to one extra year of overlapping studies compared to attaining a b.sc./m.sc. combination. this is because the higher educational system is not fully adopted to the international standard graduation system  since it is treated as a professional degree. today (2009) this is starting to change due to the bologna process. a scandinavian  civilingenjör  will in international contexts commonly call himself  master of science in engineering  and will occasionally wear an engineering class ring. at the norwegian institute of technology (now the norwegian university of science and technology) 
the tradition with an nth ring goes back to 1914  before the canadian iron ring. in norway  the title  sivilingeniør  is no longer issued after 2007  and has been replaced with  master i teknologi . in the english translation of the diploma  the title will be  master of science  since  master of technology  is not an established title in the english-speaking world. the extra overlapping year of studies have also been abolished with this change to make norwegian degrees more equal to their international counterparts.   === spain === in spain  a civil engineering degree can be obtained after four years of study in the various branches of mathematics  physics  mechanics  etc. the earned degree is called grado en ingeniería civil. further studies at a graduate school include master s and doctoral degrees. before the current situation  that is  before the implementation of bologna process in 2010  a degree in civil engineering in spain could be obtained after three to six years of study and was divided into two main degrees.  in the first case  the earned degree was called ingeniero técnico de obras públicas (itop)  literally translated as  public works engineer  obtained after three years of study and equivalent to a bachelor of civil engineering.  in the second case  the academic degree was called ingeniero de caminos  canales y puertos (often shortened to ingeniero de caminos or iccp)  that literally means  highways  canals and harbors engineer  though civil engineers in spain practice in the same fields as civil engineers do elsewhere. this degree is equivalent to a master of civil engineering and is obtained after five or six years of study depending on the school granting the title. the first spanish civil engineering school was the escuela especial de ingenieros de caminos y canales (now called escuela técnica superior de ingenieros de caminos  canales y puertos)  established in 1802 in madrid  followed by the escuela especial de ayudantes de obras públicas (now called escuela universitaria de ingeniería técnica de obras públicas de la universidad politécnica de madrid)  founded in 1854 in madrid. both schools now belong to the technical university of madrid. in spain  a civil engineer has the technical and legal ability to design projects of any branch  so any spanish civil engineer can oversee projects about structures  buildings (except residential structures which are reserved for architects)  foundations  hydraulics  the environment  transportation  urbanism  etc. in spain  mechanical and electrical engineering tasks are included under the industrial engineering degree.   === united kingdom === a chartered civil engineer (known as certified or professional engineer in other countries) is a member of the institution of civil engineers  and has also passed membership exams. however a non-chartered civil engineer may be a member of the institution of civil engineers or the institution of civil engineering surveyors.
the description  civil engineer  is not restricted to members of any particular professional organisation although  chartered civil engineer  is.   === eastern europe === in many eastern european countries  civil engineering does not exist as a distinct degree or profession but its various sub-professions are often studied in separate university faculties and performed as separate professions  whether they are taught in civilian universities or military engineering academies. even many polytechnic tertiary schools give out separate degrees for each field of study. typically study in geology  geodesy  structural engineering and urban engineering allows a person to obtain a degree in construction engineering. mechanical engineering  automotive engineering  hydraulics and even sometimes metallurgy are fields in a degree in  machinery engineering . computer sciences  control engineering and electrical engineering are fields in a degree in electrical engineering  while security  safety  environmental engineering  transportation  hydrology and meteorology are in a category of their own  typically each with their own degrees  either in separate university faculties or at polytechnic schools.   === united states === in the united states  civil engineers are typically employed by municipalities  construction firms  consulting engineering firms  architect/engineer firms  the military  state governments  and the federal government. each state requires engineers who offer their services to the public to be licensed by the state. licensure is obtained by meeting specified education  examination  and work experience requirements. specific requirements vary by state. typically licensed engineers must graduate from an abet-accredited university or college engineering program with a minimum of bachelor s degree  pass the fundamentals of engineering exam  obtain several years of engineering experience under the supervision of a licensed engineer  then pass the principles and practice of engineering exam. after completing these steps and the granting of licensure by a state board  engineers may use the title  professional engineer  or pe in advertising and documents. most states have implemented mandatory continuing education requirements to maintain a license.   == professional associations ==   === asce ===  the asce (american society of civil engineers) represents more than 140 000 members of the civil engineering profession worldwide. official members of the asce must hold a bachelor s degree from an accredited civil engineering program and be a licensed professional engineer or have five years responsible charge of engineering experience. most civil engineers join this organization to be updated of current news  projects  and methods (such as sustainability) related to civil engineering  as well as contribute their expertise and knowledge to other civil engineers and students obtaining their civil engineering degree.   === ice ===  the ice (institution of civil engineers) founded in 1818  represents  as of 2008  more than 80 000 members of the civil engineering profession worldwide. its commercial arm  thomas telford ltd  provides training  recruitment  publishing and contract services.   ===
csce ===  founded in 1887  the csce (canadian society for civil engineering) represents members of the canadian civil engineering profession. official members of the csce must hold a bachelor s degree from an accredited civil engineering program. most civil engineers join this organization to be updated of current news  projects  and methods (such as sustainability) related to civil engineering  as well as contribute their expertise and knowledge to other civil engineers and students obtaining their civil engineering degree. local sections frequently host events such as seminars  tours  and courses.   == see also ==  glossary of civil engineering canal engineer list of civil engineers professional engineer construction engineering geotechnical engineering structural engineer structural engineering urban planning transport engineering hydraulic engineering environmental engineering critical infrastructure national council of examiners for engineering and surveying   == references ==
a firefighter is a rescuer extensively trained in firefighting  primarily to extinguish hazardous fires that threaten life  property and the environment as well as to rescue people and animals from dangerous situations. the complexity of modern  industrialized life has created an increase in the skills needed in firefighting technology. the fire service  also known in some countries as the fire brigade or fire department  is one of the three main emergency services. from urban areas to aboard ships  firefighters have become ubiquitous around the world. the skills required for safe operations are regularly practiced during training evaluations throughout a firefighter s career. initial firefighting skills are normally taught through local  regional or state-approved fire academies or training courses. depending on the requirements of a department  additional skills and certifications such as technical rescue and pre-hospital medicine may also be acquired at this time. firefighters work closely with other emergency response agencies such as the police and emergency medical service. a firefighter s role may overlap with both. fire investigators or fire marshals investigate the cause of a fire. if the fire was caused by arson or negligence  their work will overlap with law enforcement. firefighters also frequently provide some degree of emergency medical service  in addition to working with full-time paramedics. the basic tasks of firefighters include  fire suppression  rescue  fire prevention  basic first aid  and investigations. firefighting is further broken down into skills which include  size-up  extinguishing  ventilation  search and rescue  salvage  containment  mop up and overhaul.   == duties ==   === fire suppression ===  a fire burns due to the presence of three elements  fuel  oxygen and heat. this is often referred to as the fire triangle. sometimes it is known as the fire tetrahedron if a fourth element is added  a chemical chain reaction which can help sustain certain types of fire. the aim of firefighting is to deprive the fire of at least one of those elements. most commonly this is done by dousing the fire with water  though some fires require other methods such as foam. firefighters are equipped with a wide variety of equipment for this purpose that include  ladder trucks  pumper trucks  tanker trucks  fire hose  and fire extinguishers.   ==== structural firefighting ==== see also fire suppression for other techniques.while sometimes fires can be limited to small areas of a structure  wider collateral damage due to smoke  water and burning embers is common. utility shutoff (such as gas and electricity) is typically an early priority for arriving fire crews. specific procedures and equipment are needed at a property where hazardous materials are being used or stored. structure fires may be attacked with either  interior  or  exterior  resources  or both. interior crews  using the  two in  two out  rule  may extend fire hose lines inside the building
 find the fire and cool it with water. exterior crews may direct water into windows and other openings  or against any nearby fuels exposed to the initial fire. hose streams directed into the interior through exterior wall apertures may conflict and jeopardize interior fire attack crews. buildings that are made of flammable materials such as wood are different from building materials such as concrete. generally  a  fire-resistant  building is designed to limit fire to a small area or floor. other floors can be safe by preventing smoke inhalation and damage. all buildings suspected or on fire must be evacuated  regardless of fire rating. some fire fighting tactics may appear to be destructive  but often serve specific needs. for example  during ventilation firefighters are forced to either open holes in the roof or floors of a structure (called vertical ventilation)  or open windows and walls (called horizontal ventilation) to remove smoke and heated gases from the interior of the structure. such ventilation methods are also used to improve interior visibility to locate victims more quickly. ventilation helps to preserve the life of trapped or unconscious individuals as it releases the poisonous gases from inside the structure. vertical ventilation is vital to firefighter safety in the event of a flashover or backdraft scenario. releasing the flammable gases through the roof eliminates the possibility of a backdraft  and the removal of heat can reduce the possibility of a flashover. flashovers  due to their intense heat (900–1200° fahrenheit) and explosive temperaments  are commonly fatal to firefighter personnel. precautionary methods  such as smashing a window  reveal backdraft situations before the firefighter enters the structure and is met with the circumstance head-on. firefighter safety is the number one priority. whenever possible during a structural fire or flooding situation  property is moved into the middle of a room and covered with a salvage cover  a heavy cloth-like tarp. various steps such as retrieving and protecting valuables found during suppression or overhaul  evacuating water  and boarding windows and roofs can divert or prevent post-fire runoff.    ==== wildland firefighting ====  wildfires (known in australia as bushfires) require a unique set of strategies and tactics. in many countries such as australia and the united states  these duties are mostly carried out by local volunteer firefighters. wildfires have some ecological role in allowing new plants to grow  therefore in some cases they will be left to burn. priorities in fighting wildfires include preventing the loss of life and property.   === rescue ===  firefighters rescue people (and animals) from dangerous situations such as crashed vehicles  structural collapses  trench collapses  cave and tunnel emergencies  water and ice emergencies  elevator emergencies  energized electrical line emergencies  and industrial accidents. in less common circumstances  firefighters rescue victims from hazardous materials emergencies as well as steep cliffs  embankment and high rises - the latter is referred to as high angle rescue  or
rope rescue. many fire departments  including most in the united kingdom  refer to themselves as a fire and rescue service for this reason. large fire departments  such as the new york city fire department and london fire brigade  have specialist teams for advanced technical rescue. as building fires have been in decline for many years in developed countries such as the united states  rescues other than fires make up an increasing proportion of their firefighters  work.   === emergency medical services === firefighters frequently provide some degree of emergency medical care. in some jurisdictions first aid is the only medical training that firefighters have  and medical-only calls are the sole responsibility of a separate emergency medical services (ems) agency. elsewhere  it is common for firefighters to respond to medical-only calls. the impetus for this is the growing demand for emergency medicine and the decline of fires and traditional firefighting call-outs—though fire departments still have to be able to respond to them—and their existing ability to respond rapidly to emergencies. a rapid response is particularly necessary for cardiac arrests  as these will lead to death if not treated within minutes.the dispatch of firefighters to medical emergencies is particularly common in fire departments that run the ems  including most large cities of the united states. in those departments  firefighters are often jointly trained as emergency medical technicians in order to deliver basic life support  and more rarely as paramedics to deliver advanced life support. in the united kingdom  where fire services and ems are run separately  fire service co-responding has been introduced more recently. another point of variation is whether the firefighters respond in a fire engine or a response car. either way  separate employees to crew ambulances are still needed  unless the firefighters can work shifts on the ambulances.   === specialized roles ===   ==== aircraft rescue & firefighting ====  airports employ specialist firefighters to deal with potential ground emergencies. due to the mass casualty potential of an aviation emergency  the speed with which emergency response equipment and personnel arrive at the scene of the emergency is of paramount importance. when dealing with an emergency  the airport firefighters are tasked with rapidly securing the aircraft  its crew and its passengers from all hazards  particularly fire. airport firefighters have advanced training in the application of firefighting foams  dry chemical and clean agents used to extinguish burning aviation fuel.   ==== hazardous materials ====  fire departments are usually the primary agency that responds to an emergency involving hazardous materials. specialized firefighters  known as hazardous materials technicians  have training and certification in chemical identification  leak control  decontamination  and clean-up procedures.   === fire prevention ===  fire departments frequently provide advice to the public on how to prevent fires in the home and work-place environments. fire inspectors or fire marshals will directly inspect businesses to ensure they are up to the current
building fire codes  which are enforced so that a building can sufficiently resist fire spread  potential hazards are located  and to ensure that occupants can be safely evacuated  commensurate with the risks involved. fire suppression systems have a proven record for controlling and extinguishing unwanted fires. many fire officials recommend that every building  including residences  have fire sprinkler systems. correctly working sprinklers in a residence greatly reduce the risk of death from a fire. with the small rooms typical of a residence  one or two sprinklers can cover most rooms.  in the united states  the housing industry trade groups have lobbied at the state level to prevent the requirement for fire sprinklers in 1 and 2 bedroom homes.other methods of fire prevention are by directing efforts to reduce known hazardous conditions or by preventing dangerous acts before tragedy strikes. this is normally accomplished in many innovative ways such as conducting presentations  distributing safety brochures  providing news articles  writing public safety announcements (psa) or establishing meaningful displays in well-visited areas. ensuring that each household has working smoke alarms  is educated in the proper techniques of fire safety  has an evacuation route and rendezvous point is of top priority in public education for most fire prevention teams in almost all fire department localities. fire investigators  who are experienced firefighters trained in fire cause determinism  are dispatched to fire scenes  in order to investigate and determine whether the fire was a result of an accident or intentional. some fire investigators have full law enforcement powers to investigate and arrest suspected arsonists.   == occupational health and safety ==   === direct risks ===   ==== fires ====  to allow protection from the inherent risks of fighting fires  firefighters wear and carry protective and self-rescue equipment at all times. a self-contained breathing apparatus (scba) delivers air to the firefighter through a full face mask and is worn to protect against smoke inhalation  toxic fumes  and super heated gases. a special device called a personal alert safety system (pass) is commonly worn independently or as a part of the scba to alert others when a firefighter stops moving for a specified period of time or manually operates the device. the pass device sounds an alarm that can assist another firefighter (firefighter assist and search team (fast)  or rapid intervention team (rit)  in locating the firefighter in distress. firefighters often carry personal self-rescue ropes. the ropes are generally 30 feet long and can provide a firefighter (that has enough time to deploy the rope) a partially controlled exit out of an elevated window. lack of a personal rescue rope is cited in the deaths of two new york city firefighters  lt. john bellew and lt. curtis meyran  who died after they jumped from the fourth floor of a burning apartment building in the bronx. of the four firefighters who jumped and survived  only one of them had a self-rescue
rope. since the incident  the fire department of new york city has issued self-rescue ropes to their firefighters.heat injury is a major issue for firefighters as they wear insulated clothing and cannot shed the heat generated from physical exertion. early detection of heat issues is critical to stop dehydration and heat stress becoming fatal. early onset of heat stress affects cognitive function which combined with operating in dangerous environment makes heat stress and dehydration a critical issue to monitor. firefighter physiological status monitoring is showing promise in alerting ems and commanders to the status of their people on the fire ground. devices such as pass device alert 10–20 seconds after a firefighter has stopped moving in a structure. physiological status monitors measure a firefighter s vital sign status  fatigue and exertion levels and transmit this information over their voice radio. this technology allows a degree of early warning to physiological stress. these devices are similar to technology developed for future force warrior and give a measure of exertion and fatigue. they also tell the people outside a building when they have stopped moving or fallen. this allows a supervisor to call in additional engines before the crew get exhausted and also gives an early warning to firefighters before they run out of air  as they may not be able to make voice calls over their radio. current osha tables exist for heat injury and the allowable amount of work in a given environment based on temperature  humidity and solar loading.   ==== structural collapses ==== another leading cause of death during firefighting is structural collapse of a burning building (e.g. a wall  floor  ceiling  roof  or truss system). structural collapse  which often occurs without warning  may crush or trap firefighters inside the structure. to avoid loss of life  all on-duty firefighters should maintain two-way communication with the incident commander and be equipped with a personal alert safety system device on all fire scenes and maintain radio communication on all incidents(pass). francis brannigan was the founder and greatest contributor to this element of firefighter safety.   ==== traffic collisions ==== in the united states  25% of fatalities of firefighters are caused by traffic collisions while responding to or returning from an incident. other firefighters have been injured or killed by vehicles at the scene of a fire or emergency (paulison 2005). a common measure fire departments have taken to prevent this is to require firefighters to wear a bright yellow reflective vest over their turnout coats if they have to work on a public road  to make them more visible to passing drivers. in addition to the direct dangers of firefighting  cardiovascular diseases account for approximately 45% of on duty firefighter deaths.   ==== violence ==== firefighters have sometimes been assaulted by members of the public while responding to calls. these kinds of attacks can cause firefighters to fear for their safety and may cause them to not have full focus on the situation which could
result in injury to their selves or the patient.   === long-term risks ===   ==== cardiovascular disease ==== firefighting has long been associated with poor cardiovascular outcomes. in the united states  the most common cause of on-duty fatalities for firefighters is sudden cardiac death. in addition to personal factors that may predispose an individual to coronary artery disease or other cardiovascular diseases  occupational exposures can significantly increase a firefighter s risk. historically  the fire service blamed poor firefighter physical condition for being the primary cause of cardiovascular related deaths. however  over the last 20 years  studies and research has indicated the toxic gasses put fire service personnel at significantly higher risk for cardiovascular related conditions and death. for instance  carbon monoxide  present in nearly all fire environments  and hydrogen cyanide  formed during the combustion of paper  cotton  plastics  and other substances containing carbon and nitrogen. the substances inside of materials change during combustion their bi-products interfere with the transport of oxygen in the body. hypoxia can then lead to heart injury. in addition  chronic exposure to particulate matter in smoke is associated with atherosclerosis. noise exposures may contribute to hypertension and possibly ischemic heart disease. other factors associated with firefighting  such as stress  heat stress  and heavy physical exertion  also increase the risk of cardiovascular events.during fire suppression activities a firefighter can reach peak or near peak heart rates which can act as a trigger for a cardiac event. for example  tachycardia can cause plaque build up to break loose and lodge itself is a small part of the heart causing myocardial infarction  also known as a heart attack. this along with unhealthy habits and lack of exercise can be very hazardous to firefighter health.   ==== cancer ====  a 2014 retrospective longitudinal study showed that firefighters are at higher risk for certain types of cancer. firefighters had mesothelioma  which is caused by asbestos exposure  at twice the rate of the non-firefighting working population. younger firefighters (under age 65) also developed bladder cancer and prostate cancer at higher rates than the general population. the risk of bladder cancer may be present in female firefighters  but research is inconclusive as of 2014. preliminary research from 2015 on a large cohort of us firefighters showed a direct relationship between the number of hours spent fighting fires and lung cancer and leukemia mortality in firefighters. this link is a topic of continuing research in the medical community  as is cancer mortality in general among firefighters.firefighters are exposed to a variety of carcinogens at fires  including both carcinogenic chemicals and radiation (alpha radiation  beta radiation  and gamma radiation).   ==== mental stress ==== as with other emergency workers  firefighters may witness traumatic scenes during their careers. they are thus more vulnerable than most people to certain mental health issues such as post-traumatic stress disorder and suicidal thoughts and behaviors. among women in the
usa  the occupations with the highest suicide rates are police and firefighters  with a rate of 14.1 per 100 000  according to the national center for injury prevention and control  cdc. chronic stress over time attributes to symptoms that affect first responders   such as anxiousness  irritability  nervousness  memory and concentration problems can occur overtime which can lead to anxiety and depression. mental stress can have long lasting affects on the brain. a 2014 report from the national fallen firefighters foundation found that a fire department is three times more likely to experience a suicide in a given year than a line-of-duty death. mental stress of the job can lead to substance abuse and alcohol abuse as ways of coping with the stress.   ==== occupational hearing loss ==== another long-term risk factor from firefighting is exposure to high levels of sound  which can cause noise-induced hearing loss (nihl) and tinnitus. nihl affects sound frequencies between 3 000 and 6 000 hertz first  then with more frequent exposure  will spread to more frequencies. many consonants will be more difficult to hear or inaudible with nihl because of the higher frequencies effected  which results in poorer communication. nihl is caused by exposure to sound levels at or above 85dba according to niosh and at or above 90dba according to osha. dba represents a-weighted decibels. dba is used for measuring sound levels relating to occupational sound exposure since it attempts to mimic the sensitivity of the human ear to different frequencies of sound. osha uses a 5-dba exchange rate  which means that for every 5dba increase in sound from 90dba  the acceptable exposure time before a risk of permanent hearing loss occurs decreases by half (starting with 8 hours acceptable exposure time at 90dba). niosh uses a 3-dba exchange rate starting at 8 hours acceptable exposure time at 85dba.the time of exposure required to potentially cause damage depends on the level of sound exposed to.  the most common causes of excessive sound exposure are sirens  transportation to and from fires  fire alarms  and work tools. traveling in an emergency vehicle has shown to expose a person to between 103 and 114dba of sound. according to osha  exposure at this level is acceptable for between 17 and 78 minutes and according to niosh is acceptable for between 35 seconds and 7.5 minutes  over a 24-hour day before permanent hearing loss can occur. this time period considers that no other high level sound exposure occurs in that 24-hour time frame. sirens often output about 120 dba  which according to osha  7.5 minutes of exposure is needed and according to niosh  9 seconds of exposure is needed in a 24-hour time period before permanent hearing loss can occur. in addition to high sound levels  another risk factor for hearing disorders is the co-exposure to chemicals that are ototoxic.the average day of work for a firefighter can often be under the sound exposure
limit for both osha and niosh. while the average day of sound exposure as a firefighter is often under the limit  firefighters can be exposed to impulse noise  which has a very low acceptable time exposure before permanent hearing damage can occur due to the high intensity and short duration.there are also high rates of hearing loss  often nihl  in firefighters  which increases with age and number of years working as a firefighter. hearing loss prevention programs have been implemented in multiple stations and have shown to help lower the rate of firefighters with nihl. other attempts have been made to lower sound exposures for firefighters  such as enclosing the cabs of the firetrucks to lower the siren exposure while driving. nfpa (national fire protection association) is responsible for occupational health programs and standards in firefighters which discusses what hearing sensitivity is required to work as a firefighter  but also enforces baseline (initial) and annual hearing tests (based on osha hearing maintenance regulations). while nihl can be a risk that occurs from working as a firefighter  nihl can also be a safety concern for communicating while doing the job as communicating with coworkers and victims is essential for safety. hearing protection devices have been used by firefighters in the united states. earmuffs are the most commonly used hearing protection device (hpd) as they are the most easy to put on correctly in a quick manner. multiple fire departments have used hpds that have communication devices built in  allowing firefighters to speak with each other at safe  but audible sound levels  while lowering the hazardous sound levels around them.   == types of coverage and workload ==  in a country with a comprehensive fire service  fire departments must be able to send firefighters to emergencies at any hour of day or night  to arrive on the scene within minutes. in urban areas  this means that full-time paid firefighters usually have shift work  with some providing cover each night. on the other hand  it may not be practical to employ full-time firefighters in villages and isolated small towns  where their services may not be required for days at a time. for this reason  many fire departments have firefighters who spend long periods on call to respond to infrequent emergencies  they may have regular jobs outside of firefighting. whether they are paid or not varies by country. in the united states and germany  volunteer fire departments provide most of the cover in rural areas. in the united kingdom and ireland  by contrast  actual volunteers are rare. instead   retained firefighters  are paid for responding to incidents  along with a small salary for spending long periods of time on call.   == firefighting around the world ==  a key difference between many country s fire services is what the balance is between full-time and volunteer (or on-call) firefighters. in the united states and united kingdom  large
metropolitan fire departments are almost entirely made up of full-time firefighters. on the other hand  in germany and austria  volunteers play a substantial role even in the largest fire departments  including berlin s  which serves a population of 3.6 million. regardless of how this balance works  a common feature is that smaller urban areas have a mix of full-time and volunteer/on-call firefighters. this is known in the united states as a combination fire department. in chile and peru  all firefighters are volunteers.another point of variation is how the fire services are organized. some countries like israel and new zealand have a single national fire service. others like australia  the united kingdom and france organize fire services based on regions or sub-national states. in the united states  germany and canada  fire departments are run at a municipal level. atypically  singapore and many parts of switzerland have fire service conscription. in germany  conscription can also be used if a village does not have a functioning fire service. other unusual arrangements are seen in france  where two of the country s fire services (the paris fire brigade and the marseille naval fire battalion) are part of the armed forces  and denmark  where most fire services are run by private companies.another way in which a firefighter s work varies around the world is the nature of firefighting equipment and tactics. for example  american fire departments make heavier use of aerial appliances  and are often split between engine and ladder companies. in europe  where the size and usefulness of aerial appliances are often limited by narrow streets  they used only for rescues  and firefighters can rotate between working on an engine and an aerial appliance.  a final point in variation is how involved firefighters are in emergency medical services.   == communication and command structure ==  the expedient and accurate handling of fire alarms or calls are significant factors in the successful outcome of any incident. fire department communications play a critical role in that successful outcome. fire department communications include the methods by which the public can notify the communications center of an emergency  the methods by which the center can notify the proper fire fighting forces  and the methods by which information is exchanged at the scene. one method is to use a megaphone to communicate. a telecommunicator (often referred to as a 000 operator) has a role different from but just as important as other emergency personnel. the telecommunicator must process calls from unknown and unseen individuals  usually calling under stressful conditions. he/she must be able to obtain complete  reliable information from the caller and prioritize requests for assistance. it is the dispatcher s responsibility to bring order to chaos. while some fire departments are large enough to utilize their own telecommunication dispatcher  most rural and small areas rely on a central dispatcher to provide handling of fire  rescue  and police services. firefighters are trained
to use communications equipment to receive alarms  give and receive commands  request assistance  and report on conditions. since firefighters from different agencies routinely provide mutual aid to each other  and routinely operate at incidents where other emergency services are present  it is essential to have structures in place to establish a unified chain of command  and share information between agencies. the u.s. federal emergency management agency (fema) has established a national incident management system. one component of this system is the incident command system. all radio communication in the united states is under authorization from the federal communications commission (fcc)  as such  fire departments that operate radio equipment must have radio licenses from the fcc. ten codes were popular in the early days of radio equipment because of poor transmission and reception. advances in modern radio technology have reduced the need for ten-codes and many departments have converted to simple english (clear text).   === ranks === many firefighters are sworn officers with command structures similar to the military and police. they do not have general police powers (some firefighters in the united states have limited police powers  like fire police departments  while certain fire marshals have full police powers  i.e. the ability to make warrantless arrests  and authority to carry a firearm on and off-duty)  but have specific powers of enforcement and control in fire and emergency situations. the basic unit of an american fire department is a  company  a group of firefighters who typically work on the same engine. a  crew  or  platoon  is a subdivision of a company who work on the same shift. commonwealth fire services are more likely to be organized around a  watch  who work the same shift on multiple engines.   ==== australia ==== new south wales rural fire service   ==== belgium ==== new rank structure of 2015.   ==== canada ==== ranks amongst canadian firefighters vary across the country and ranking appears mostly with larger departments  toronto  montreal  vancouver   ==== chile ==== ranks are divided between company officers and fire department officers  which can be subdivided between active officers (field officers) and administrative officers each. the active officers are the captain  and two or three lieutenants  these three active officers are distinguished by their red helmets.   ==== commonwealth ==== most fire brigades in commonwealth countries (except canada) have a more  civilianised  nomenclature  structured in a traditional manner. for example  the common structure in united kingdom brigades is    ==== denmark ====   ==== france ==== french civilian fire services  which historically are derived from french army sapper units  use french army ranks. the highest rank in many departments is full colonel. only the nco rank of major is used in both the paris fire brigade and the marseille naval fire battalion  since 2013 it has been abolished in
the other fire departments.  ministry of interior director general of civil security and crisis management  director of fire protection  comptroller generalcivilian fire services (professional fire fighters class a+) comptroller general  colonel senior class/colonelcivilian fire services (professional fire fighters class a) lieutenant colonel  commandant  captaincivilian fire services (professional fire fighters class b) lieutenant senior class/lieutenant first class/lieutenant second classcivilian fire services (professional fire fighters class c) adjutant with three years time-in-grade gets the insignia and title of chief adjutant  adjutant  sergeant with three years time-in-grade gets the insignia and title of chief sergeant  sergeant  chief corporal  corporal  sapper   ==== germany ==== in germany every federal state has its own civil protection laws thus they have different rank systems. additionally  in the volunteer fire departments  there is a difference between a rank and an official position. this is founded on the military traditions of the fire departments. every firefighter can hold a high rank without having an official position. a firefighter can be promoted by years of service  training skills and qualifications. official positions are partly elected or given by capabilities. these conditions allow that older ordinary firefighters have higher ranks than their leaders. but through this ranks are no authorities given (brevet).  professional fire fighters (middle technical grades) of rheinland-pfalzcompleted vocational training in a technical occupation suitable for the fire service. basic firefighter training.  professional fire fighters (upper technical grades) of rheinland-pfalzbachelor of engineering and two years departmental training.  professional fire fighters (higher technical grades) of rheinland-pfalzmaster of engineering and two years of departmental training.  helmet insignia of rheinland-pfalz   ==== indonesia ==== firefighters in indonesia form part of the civil service of local governments and wear variant forms of uniforms worn by civil servants and employees.   ==== italy ==== the vigili del fuoco  (literally the word  vigili  comes from the latin word  vigiles  which means  who is part of certain guards ) have the official name of corpo nazionale dei vigili del fuoco (cnvvf  national firefighters corps). the cnvvf is the italian institutional agency for fire and rescue service. it is part of the ministry of interior s department of firefighters  public rescue and public protection. the cnvvf task is to provide safety for people  animals and property  and control the compliance of buildings and industries to fire safety rules. the ministry of the interior  through the cnvvf  adopts fire safety rules with ministerial decrees or other lower rank documents. the cnvvf also ensures public rescue in emergencies that involves the use of chemical weapons  bacteriological  radiological and materials. since 2012 the corps uses its own rank titles (dating from 2007) with matching military styled insignia in honor of its origins. in 2016 the cnvvf has been committed in forest firefighting activities together with the regional forest agencies  following the suppression of the national forest guards  which were merged into the carabinieri
(firefighters were integrated into the cnvvf). .   ==== iran ==== in iran  every city has its own fire department  but ranks are the same in the whole country  and are as follows    ==== ireland ==== in ireland  the traditional brigade rank structure is still adopted. below is the common structure for most brigades  cork and dublin fire brigade have additional ranks    ==== japan ====  japanese fire department s rank insignias are place on a small badge and pinned above the right pocket. rank is told by stripes and hexagram stars. the design of the insignias came from older japanese style military insignias. officers and team leaders could wear an arm band on the arm of fire jacket to show status as command leader. sometimes rank can be shown as different color fire jacket for command staff. the color whites and gray are reserved for ems. orange is reserved for rescuer.   ==== luxembourg ==== grand-ducal fire and rescue corps of luxembourg.  basic cadre of professional and volunteer fire fighters                         middle cadre of professional and volunteer fire fighters             higher cadre of professional and volunteer fire fighters                           ==== malaysia ====   ==== netherlands ====   ==== new zealand ==== in new zealand  rank is shown on epaulettes on firefighters  station uniform  and through colors and stripes on firefighter helmets. as the nation only has a single fire department  the new zealand fire service  ranks are consistent through the country.   ==== poland ====   ==== russian federation ====  in the russian federation  the decals are applied symmetrically on both sides of the helmet (front and rear). the location of the decals on the special clothing and scba is established for each fire department of the same type within the territorial entity. the following ranks are used by state fire service civilian personnel  while military personnel use ranks similar to those of the police of russia  due to their pre-2001 history as the fire service of the ministry of internal affairs of the russian federation before all firefighting services were transferred to the ministry of emergency situations.   ==== tunisia ==== tunisian firefighter s ranks are actually the same as the army  police and national garde.   ==== united kingdom ==== london fire brigade   ==== united states of america ====  in the united states  helmet colors often denote a fire fighter s rank or position. in general  white helmets denote chief officers  while red helmets may denote company officers  but the specific meaning of
a helmet s color or style varies from region to region and department to department. the rank of an officer in an american fire department is most commonly denoted by a number of speaking trumpets  a reference to a megaphone-like device used in the early days of the fire service  although typically called  bugle  in today s parlance. ranks proceed from one (lieutenant) to five (fire chief) bugles. traditional ranks in american fire departments that exist but may not always be utilized in all cities or towns include   in many fire departments in the u.s.  the captain is commonly the commander of a company and a lieutenant is the supervisor of the company s firefighters on shift. there is no state or federal rank structure for firefighters and each municipality or volunteer fire department creates and uses their own unique structure. still  some other american fire departments such the fdny use military rank insignia in addition or instead of the traditional bugles. additionally  officers on truck companies have been known to use rank insignias shaped like axes for lieutenants (1) and captains (2).   == firefighter equipment ==           a partial list of some equipment typically used by firefighters   hand tools  such as flat-head and pick-head axe pike pole halligan bar flashlight spanner wrench circular ( k-12 )  cutters edge and chain saws hydraulic rescue tools such as spreaders  cutters  and rams personal protective equipment ( ppe ) designed to withstand water and high temperatures  such as bunker gear  including turnout jacket and pants self-contained breathing apparatus (scba) helmet  face mask and visor  climbing helmets safety boots  gloves  and nomex and carbon flash hoods personal alert safety system (pass) device handheld radio  pager  or other communication devices thermal imaging camera gas detector   == history ==  although people have fought fires since there have been valuable things to burn  the first instance of organized professionals combating structural fires occurred in ancient egypt. likewise  fire fighters of the roman republic existed solely as privately organized and funded groups that operated more similarly to a business than a public service  however  during the principate period augustus revolutionized firefighting by calling for the creation of a fire guard that was trained  paid  and equipped by the state- the first truly public and professional firefighting service. known as the vigiles  they were organised into cohorts and also served as a night watch and city police force. the earliest american fire departments were volunteers  including the volunteer fire company in new amsterdam  now known as new york. fire companies were composed of citizens who volunteered their time to help protect the community. as time progressed and new towns popped up throughout the region there was a sharp increase in the number of volunteer departments. the first career fire department was not established in
the united states until 1853 in cincinnati  ohio (cincinnati fire & ems department). many large cities began establishing paid  full-time  staff in order to try facilitate greater fire-related call volume. st. louis fire department followed cincinnati four years later and became the second established career fire department in the country followed by other large cities like new york (fdny). city fire departments draw their funding directly from city taxes and share the same budget as other public works like the police department and trash services. aside from big city fire departments  many populated suburbs and towns have career fire departments. the primary difference between a municipality department and a city department is the funding. municipal fire departments do not share their budget with any other service and are considered to be private entities within a jurisdiction. this means that they have their own taxes that feed into their budgeting needs. another main difference is the structure of the department. city fire departments have the mayor at the top of the chain whereas municipal departments have elected board officials who help maintain and run the department along with the chief officer staff.   == fundraisers == funds for fire-fighting equipment may be raised by the firefighters themselves  especially in the case of volunteer organizations. events such as pancake breakfasts and chili feeds are common in the us. social events are also used to raise money  including dances  community fairs and car washes.   == notable firefighters == james braidwood (firefighter) (1800–1861)  founder of the municipal fire brigade in edinburgh  1824 john decker (1823–1892)  chief of the new york city department during the 1863 draft riots raúl gándara-cartagena (1895–1989)  first and longest-serving puerto rico commonwealth fire chief james j. kenney (1869–1918)  berkeley  california  politician  the city s first fire chief louis r. nowell (1915–2009)  los angeles  california  city council member  a firefighter for 23 years chip prather (born 1953)  second chief of the orange county  california  fire authority vladimir pravik (1962-1986)  soviet firefighter who worked in the chernobyl disaster  died on 11 may from acute radiation sickness joseph pfeifer  new york city  new york  chief of counterterrorism and emergency preparedness  was the first to make an official report of 9/11 and headed the operations at wtc   == see also == firefighting apparatus firefighting firefighter arson history of firefighting incident command system index of firefighting articles rescue smokejumper volunteer fire department wildfire suppression wildland firefighter foundation women in firefighting   == references ==   == external links ==  media related to firefighter at wikimedia commons
a graphic designer is a professional within the graphic design and graphic arts industry who assembles together images  typography  or motion graphics to create a piece of design. a graphic designer creates the graphics primarily for published  printed or electronic media  such as brochures (sometimes) and advertising. they are also sometimes responsible for typesetting  illustration  user interfaces  and web design. a core responsibility of the designer s job is to present information in a way that is both accessible and memorable.   == qualifications == a bachelor s degree  or certificate  from an accredited trade school is usually considered essential for a graphic design position. after a career history has been established  though  the graphic designer s experience and number of years in the business are considered the primary qualifications.  a portfolio  which is the primary method for demonstrating these qualifications  is usually required to be shown at job interviews  and is constantly developed throughout a designer s career. one can obtain an aas  ba  bfa  bca   mfa or an mphil / phd in graphic design. degree programs available vary depending upon the institution  although typical u.s. graphic design jobs may require at least some form of degree. current graphic designer jobs demand proficiency in one or more graphic design software programs. a common software package used in the graphic design industry is adobe creative cloud. this software package contains the three main programs used by graphic designers  which are photoshop  illustrator and indesign. photoshop  indesign  and illustrator are the industry standard applications for many graphic design positions. another example of a common software package is coreldraw graphics suite. outside the graphic design industry  many people use microsoft word or microsoft publisher to create a layout or design. however  depending on the job at hand  most designers create the layout in either indesign  coreldraw or quarkxpress. specifically  the designer will type or import the text in the layout program  also importing the graphics and images they created in photoshop or illustrator. there are a couple of reasons a designer builds a layout in this fashion   files going to press are generally printed at 300 dots per inch. as a result  the file size can become very large  depending upon the photos and graphics used in it. by using a layout program and linking these graphics and images (but not saving all of them in the file itself)  the working file is a fraction of the file size. when the designer is ready to go to press  s/he will either create a press-ready pdf  or use the  package  function in indesign  or the  collect for output  function in quarkxpress or coreldraw (which gathers the layout document  plus all fonts and images used therein  and saves them in one folder which can be provided to a commercial printing
company for final output). indesign  coreldraw  or quarkxpress make it possible to work with large multiple page layouts  such as catalogs and booklets. since indesign  coreldraw  and quarkxpress the original file  linking to the graphics and images  the designer can change the  original file  and it will update all instances throughout the document to save time.a web designer should understand how to work with xml  html  and basic web programming scripts. a print designer should understand the processes involved in printing (including  notably  offset printing) to be able to produce press-ready artwork. designers should be able to solve visual communication problems or challenges. in doing so  the designer must identify the communications issue  gather and analyze information related to the issue  and generate potential approaches aimed at solving the problem.  iterative prototyping and user testing can be used to determine the success or failure of a visual solution. approaches to a communications problem are developed in the context of an audience and a media channel.  graphic designers must understand the social and cultural norms of that audience in order to develop visual solutions that are perceived as relevant  understandable and effective.graphic designers should also have a thorough understanding of production and rendering methods. some of the technologies and methods of production are drawing  offset printing  photography  and time-based and interactive media (film  video  computer multimedia). frequently  designers are also called upon to manage color in different media.   == career portfolio == fifty years ago  the graphic designer s portfolio  was usually a black book or large binder in which samples of the artist s best printed pieces were carried to show prospective clients or employers. printed pieces are often protected inside by being mounted on boards or slipped into acetate sleeves. since the 1990s  portfolios have become increasingly computer digitized and now may be entirely digitized and available on the internet  or on cd  dvd  or via email.   == branding == graphic design relates heavily to corporate identity  the branding  and  persona  of a corporation. branding originated in the late 1890s and not only did it emerge as corporate identity  but it also signified corporate quality. many might recognize the process of  branding  a hot iron symbol or logo onto an animal s body to differentiate other cattle. branding your business or any other type of asset that requires an identity does help one to be recognized in a commercialized industry. exceptional graphic designers can easily create a brand that fits the company as well as define it through one simple logo.   == see also == graphic design occupations list of graphic designers mood board   == references ==
a hairdresser is a person whose occupation is to cut or style hair in order to change or maintain a person s image. this is achieved using a combination of hair coloring  haircutting  and hair texturing techniques. most hairdressers are professionally licensed as either a hairdresser  a barber or a cosmetologist.   == history ==   === ancient hairdressing === hairdressing as an occupation dates back thousands of years. ancient art drawings and paintings have been discovered depicting people working on another person s hair. greek writers aristophanes and homer both mention hairdressing in their writings. in africa  it was believed in some cultures that a person s spirit occupied his or her hair  giving hairdressers high status within these communities. the status of hairdressing encouraged many to develop their skills  and close relationships were built between hairdressers and their clients. hours would be spent washing  combing  oiling  styling and ornamenting their hair. men would work specifically on men  and women on other women. before a master hairdresser died  they would give their combs and tools to a chosen successor during a special ceremony.in ancient egypt  hairdressers had specially decorated cases to hold their tools  including lotions  scissors and styling materials. barbers also worked as hairdressers  and wealthy men often had personal barbers within their home. with the standard of wig wearing within the culture  wigmakers were also trained as hairdressers. in ancient rome and greece household slaves and servants took on the role of hairdressers  including dyeing and shaving.  men who did not have their own private hair or shaving services would visit the local barbershop. women had their hair maintained and groomed at their homes. historical documentation is lacking regarding hairstylists from the 5th century until the 14th century. hair care service grew in demand after a  papal decree in 1092 demanded that all roman catholic clergymen remove their facial hair.   === europe ===  the first appearance of the word  hairdresser  is in 17th century europe  and hairdressing was considered a profession. hair fashion of the period suggested that wealthy women wear large  complex and heavily adorned hairstyles  which would be maintained by their personal maids and other people  who would spend hours dressing the woman s hair. a wealthy man s hair would often be maintained by a valet. it was in france where men began styling women s hair for the first time  and many of the notable hairdressers of the time were men  a trend that would continue into contemporary times. the first famous male hairdresser was champagne  who was born in southern france. upon moving to paris  he opened his own hair salon and dressed the hair of wealthy parisian women until his death in 1658.women s hair grew taller in style during the 17th century  popularized by the hairdresser madame martin. the hairstyle   the tower  was the
trend with wealthy english and american women  who relied on hairdressers to style their hair as tall as possible. tall piles of curls were pomaded  powdered and decorated with ribbons  flowers  lace  feathers and jewelry. the profession of hairdressing was launched as a genuine profession when legros de rumigny was declared the first official hairdresser of the french court. in 1765 de rumigny published his book art de la coiffure des dames  which discussed hairdressing and included pictures of hairstyles designed by him. the book was a best seller amongst frenchwomen  and four years later de rumigny opened a school for hairdressers  academie de coiffure. at the school he taught men and women to cut hair and create his special hair designs.by 1777  approximately 1 200 hairdressers were working in paris. during this time  barbers formed unions  and demanded that hairdressers do the same. wigmakers also demanded that hairdressers cease taking away from their trade  and hairdressers responded that their roles were not the same  hairdressing was a service  and wigmakers made and sold a product. de rumigny died in 1770 and other hairdressers gained in popularity  specifically three frenchmen  frederic  larseueur  and léonard. leonard and larseueur were the stylists for marie antoinette.  leonard was her favorite  and developed many hairstyles that became fashion trends within wealthy parisian circles  including the loge d opera  which towered five feet over the wearer s head. during the french revolution he escaped the country hours before he was to be arrested  alongside the king  queen  and other clients. he emigrated to russia  where he worked as the premier hairdresser for russian nobility.   === 19th century ===  parisian hairdressers continued to develop influential styles during the early 19th century. wealthy french women would have their favorite hairdressers style their hair from within their own homes  a trend seen in wealthy international communities. hairdressing was primarily a service affordable only to those wealthy enough to hire professionals or to pay for servants to care for their hair. in the united states  marie laveau was one of the most famous hairdressers of the period. laveau  located in new orleans  began working as a hairdresser in the early 1820s  maintaining the hair of wealthy women of the city. she was a voodoo practitioner  called the  voodoo queen of new orleans  and she used her connections to wealthy women to support her religious practice. she provided  help  to women who needed it for money  gifts and other favors.french hairdresser marcel grateau developed the  marcel wave  in the late part of the century. his wave required the use of a special hot hair iron and needed to be done by an experienced hairdresser. fashionable women asked to have their hair  marceled.  during this period  hairdressers began opening salons in cities and towns  led by martha
matilda harper  who developed one of the first retail chains of hair salons  the harper method.   === 20th century === beauty salons became popularized during the 20th century  alongside men s barbershops. these spaces served as social spaces  allowing women to socialize while having their hair done and other services such as facials. wealthy women still had hairdressers visit their home  but  the majority of women visited salons for services  including high-end salons such as elizabeth arden s red door salon.major advancements in hairdressing tools took place during this period. electricity led to the development of permanent wave machines and hair dryers. these tools allowed hairdressers to promote visits to their salons  over limited service in-home visits. new coloring processes were developed  including those by eugene schueller in paris  which allowed hairdressers to perform complicated styling techniques. after world war i  the bob cut and the shingle bob became popular  alongside other short haircuts. in the 1930s complicated styles came back into fashion  alongside the return of the marcel wave. hairdressing was one of the few acceptable professions during this time for women  alongside teaching  nursing and clerical work.   == hairdressers today ==   === united states === occupationally  hairdressing is expected to grow faster than the average for all other occupations  at 20%. a state license is required for hairdressers to practice  with qualifications varying from state to state. generally a person interested in hairdressing must have a high school diploma or ged  be at least 16 years of age  and have graduated from a state-licensed barber or cosmetology school. full-time programs often last 9 months or more  leading to an associate degree. after students graduate from a program  they take a state licensing exam  which often consists of a written test  and a practical test of styling or an oral exam. hairdressers must pay for licenses  and occasionally licenses must be renewed. some states allow hairdressers to work without obtaining a new license  while others require a new license. about 44% of hairdressers are self-employed  often putting in 40-hour work weeks  and even longer among the self-employed. in 2008  29% of hairstylists worked part-time  and 14% had variable schedules. as of 2008  people working as hairdressers totaled about 630 700  with a projected increase to 757 700 by 2018.   == see also == asymmetric cut hairstyle hollywood makeup artist and hair stylist guild awards   == references ==
a barber is a person whose occupation is mainly to cut  dress  groom  style and shave men s and boys  hair. a barber s place of work is known as a  barbershop  or a  barber s . barbershops are also places of social interaction and public discourse. in some instances  barbershops are also public forums. they are the locations of open debates  voicing public concerns  and engaging citizens in discussions about contemporary issues. in previous times  barbers (known as barber surgeons) also performed surgery and dentistry. with the development of safety razors and the decreasing prevalence of beards  in anglophonic cultures  most barbers now specialize in cutting men s scalp hair as opposed to facial hair.   == terminology ==  in modern times  the term  barber  is used both as a professional title and to refer to hairdressers who specialize in men s hair. historically  all hairdressers were considered barbers. in the 20th century  the profession of cosmetology branched off from barbering  and today hairdressers may be licensed as either barbers or cosmetologists. barbers differ with respect to where they work  which services they are licensed to provide  and what name they use to refer to themselves. part of this terminology difference depends on the regulations in a given location. in the early 1900s an alternative word for barber   chirotonsor  came into use in the u.s. different states in the us vary on their labor and licensing laws. for example  in maryland and pennsylvania  a cosmetologist cannot use a straight razor  strictly reserved for barbers. in contrast  in new jersey both are regulated by the state board of cosmetology and there is no longer a legal difference in barbers and cosmetologists  as they are issued the same license and can practice both the art of straight razor shaving  coloring  other chemical work and haircutting if they choose. in australia  the official term for a barber is hairdresser  barber is only a popular title for men s hairdressers  although not as popular now as it was in the middle of the 20th century. most would work in a hairdressing salon.   == history == the barber s trade has a long history  razors have been found among relics of the bronze age (around 3500 bc) in egypt. the first barbering services were performed by egyptians in 5000 b.c. with instruments they had made from oyster shells or sharpened flint. in ancient egyptian culture  barbers were highly respected individuals. priests and men of medicine are the earliest recorded examples of barbers. in addition  the art of barbering played a significant role across continents. mayan  aztec  iroquois  viking and mongolian civilizations utilized shave art as a way to distinguish roles in society and wartime. men in ancient greece would have their beards  hair  and fingernails trimmed and styled by the
κουρεύς (cureus)  in an agora (market place) which also served as a social gathering for debates and gossip. barbering was introduced to rome by the greek colonies in sicily in 296 bc  and barbershops quickly became very popular centres for daily news and gossip. a morning visit to the tonsor became a part of the daily routine  as important as the visit to the public baths  and a young man s first shave (tonsura) was considered an essential part of his coming of age ceremony. a few roman tonsores became wealthy and influential  running shops that were favourite public locations of high society  however  most were simple tradesmen  who owned small storefronts or worked in the streets for low prices.starting from the middle ages  barbers often served as surgeons and dentists. in addition to haircutting  hairdressing  and shaving  barbers performed surgery  bloodletting and leeching  fire cupping  enemas  and the extraction of teeth  earning them the name  barber surgeons . barber-surgeons began to form powerful guilds such as the worshipful company of barbers in london. barbers received higher pay than surgeons until surgeons were entered into british warships during naval wars. some of the duties of the barber included neck manipulation  cleansing of ears and scalp  draining of boils  fistula and lancing of cysts with wicks.   === 19th century === barbershops were influential at the turn of the 19th century in the united states as african american businesses that helped to develop african american culture and economy. according to trudier harris   in addition to its status as a gathering place  the black barbershop also functioned as a complicated and often contradictory microcosm of the larger world. it is an environment that can bolster egos and be supportive as well as a place where phony men can be destroyed  or at least highly shamed  from participation in verbal contests and other contests of skill. it is a retreat  a haven  an escape from nagging wives and the cares of the world. it is a place where men can be men. it is a place  in contrast to gordone s bar  to be somebody.   barbershops from black barbers at first mostly served wealthy caucasians. in the later part of the century they opened barbershops in black communities for serving black people.the average shop cost $20 to equip in 1880. it was about ten by twelve feet. a hair cut in 1880 would cost five or ten cents and shaving cost three cents.   === 20th century and later === in the late 19th and early 20th century barbershops became a common business where people would go to have their hair cut by a professional barber with good equipment. people would also play board games  talk about recent events and farming business or gossip. they can sometimes also be used for public debates or voicing public concerns.most modern barbershops have
special barber chairs  and special equipment for rinsing and washing hair. in some barbershops  people can read magazines or watch tv while the barber works. despite the economic recession in 2008  the barbershop industry has seen continued positive growth. recently there was a trial that had barbers check high blood pressure in barbershops and have a pharmacist meet and treat the patient in the barbershop  with positive results.in 2018 arthur rubinoff opened a museum with barber s poles and antique barber equipment in manhattan.the barber sam mature  whose interview with studs terkel was published in terkel s 1974 book working  says  a man used to get a haircut every couple weeks. now he waits a month or two  some of  em even longer than that. a lot of people would get manicured and fixed up every week. most of these people retired  moved away  or passed away. it s all on account of long hair. you take old-timers  they wanted to look neat  to be presentable. now people don t seem to care too much.  given their importance as social hubs in certain cultures  barbershops have been used in educational campaigns. these include the u.s. literacy project barbershop books  which sets up reading stations in barbershops to promote a culture of reading among african american boys. public health researchers have also explored barbershops as a venue for sexual health education.                   === barber schools === in 1893  a. b. moler of chicago  established a school for barbers. this was the first institution of its kind in the world  and its success was apparent from its very start. it stood for higher education in the ranks  and the parent school was rapidly followed by branches in nearly every principal city of the united states. in the beginning of barber schools  only the practical work of shaving  hair-cutting  facial treatments  etc.  was taught as neither the public nor the profession were ready to accept scientific treatments of hair  skin and scalp. not until about 1920 was much effort made to professionalize the work.training to be a barber is achieved through various means around the world. in the us  barber training is carried out at  barber schools . cost—many states require a barber license in order to practice barbering professionally. the cost of barber school varies from state to state  and also from metro area to metro area. schools in larger metropolitan areas tend to cost more than those located in more rural towns. brand names can also affect the cost of barber school. most barber schools cost between $6 500 and $10 000 to complete. because each state has different minimums for training hours  the length and cost of the program can vary accordingly. some schools tuition includes supplies and textbooks  whereas others do not. barber
license exam fees typically range from $50 to $150.length—most states require the same amount of training hours for barbers as they do for cosmetologists. the number of hours required ranges from 800 to 2 000 training hours  depending on the state s licensing requirements. most programs can be completed in 15 months or fewer.curriculum—the barber school curriculum consists of hair cutting  coloring and styling for men s hair and women s short hair. chemical processes such as bleaching  dyeing  lightening and relaxing hair may also be taught. all cosmetology disciplines learn safety and sanitation best practices. barber students can expect to learn some elements of anatomy  physiology  bacteriology and some small elements of pharmacology. it also teaches facial hair techniques  including traditional and modern shaves. generally barber programs touch on scalp massage and treatments. advanced barber training may include custom shave designs. it is more common in barbering schools than other cosmetology disciplines to get some business and ethics education  since entrepreneurship is especially common in the barbering trade with many professionals choosing to open their own barbershops. all the skills learned in barber school will be tested at the board exams  which typically feature a written and practical exam.   == barber s pole ==  the barber pole  featuring red and white spiraling stripes  symbolized different aspects of the craft. it is a symbol from the time when barbers used to perform medical procedures. the white and red stripes represent bandages and blood while the blue stripes represent veins. in the u.s.  the blue stripe is also sometimes used to match the flag.   == equipment == barber chair hair clipper barber cloth or wrap (victoria  australia) barber powder (talcum powder or baby powder) hairbrush comb barber neck paper/tape barber mirror or back mirror hair brilliantine disinfectant or barbercide (fansuan  belize) hair cream hair dryer  hair blower or blow drier hair gel hair pomade hair scissors hair spray hair tonic hair wax shave brush shaving oil straight razor station mat mustache wax shaving soap or shaving creamthe market for barber supplies is estimated to have revenue of around twenty billion dollars. the industry in the u.s. market is expected to grow by around 3% per year between 2017 and 2022.   == animals == the term  barbering  when applied to laboratory mice is a behaviour where mice will use their teeth to pluck out hairs from the face of cage mates when they groom each other. it is practised by both male and female mice. the  barber  plucks the vibrissae of the recipient. the behavior is probably related to social dominance.   == see also == barbasol barber chair barber paradox barber surgeon barber s pole barbershop music beauty salon cosmetology dovo solingen facial hair hairstyle list of barbers straight razor thiers issard worshipful company of barbers   == references ==   == further reading == andrews  william. (cottingham  yorkshire  j.r. tutin
 1904) at the sign of the barber s pole  studies in hirsute history. 118 pages. j. r. tutin. and here for project gutenberg. andrews  william  the sign of the barber s pole  studies in hirsute history (illustrated edition) (dodo press) william andrews (dodo press  2009) 90 pages. lethe press paperback 108 pages isbn 978-1-59021-081-9 rothman  irving n.  ed. the barber in modern jewish culture. a genre of people  places  and things  with illustrations. foreword  maximillian e. novak. lewiston  ny  the edward mellen press  2008. 714 pp.   == external links ==  media related to barbershops at wikimedia commons  barber  . encyclopædia britannica. 3 (11th ed.). 1911. barber statistics
in modern medicine  a surgeon is a physician who performs surgical operations. there are also surgeons in podiatry  dentistry  orthodontics and the veterinary fields.   == history ==  the first person to document a surgery was the 6th century bc indian physician-surgeon  sushruta. he specialized in cosmetic plastic surgery and even documented an operation of open rhinoplasty. his magnum opus suśruta-saṃhitā is one of the most important surviving ancient treatises on medicine and is considered a foundational text of both ayurveda and surgery. the treatise addresses all aspects of general medicine  but the translator g. d. singhal dubbed suśruta  the father of surgical intervention  on account of the extraordinarily accurate and detailed accounts of surgery to be found in the work.after the eventual decline of the sushruta school of medicine in india  surgery was largely ignored until the islamic golden age surgeon al-zahrawi (936-1013)  re-established surgery as an effective medical practice. he is considered the greatest medieval surgeon to have appeared from the islamic world  and has also been described as the father of surgery. his greatest contribution to medicine is the kitab al-tasrif  a thirty-volume encyclopedia of medical practices.  he was the first physician to describe an ectopic pregnancy  and the first physician to identify the hereditary nature of hæmophilia.his pioneering contributions to the field of surgical procedures and instruments had an enormous impact on surgery but it was not until the eighteenth century that surgery emerged as a distinct medical discipline in england.in europe  surgery was mostly associated with barber-surgeons who also used their hair-cutting tools to undertake surgical procedures  often at the battlefield and also for their employers. with advances in medicine and physiology  the professions of barbers and surgeons diverged  by the 19th century barber-surgeons had virtually disappeared  and surgeons were almost invariably qualified doctors who had specialized in surgery. surgeon continued  however  to be used as the title for military medical officers until the end of the 19th century  and the title of surgeon general continues to exist for both senior military medical officers and senior government public health officers.   == titles in the commonwealth == in 1950  the royal college of surgeons of england (rcs) in london began to offer surgeons a formal status via rcs membership. the title mister became a badge of honour  and today  in many commonwealth countries  a qualified doctor who  after at least four years  training  obtains a surgical qualification (formerly fellow of the royal college of surgeons  but now also member of the royal college of surgeons or a number of other diplomas) is given the honour of being allowed to revert to calling themselves mr  miss  mrs or ms in the course of their professional practice  but this time the meaning is different. it is sometimes assumed that the change of title implies consultant status (and some mistakenly think non-surgical consultants are mr
too)  but the length of postgraduate medical training outside north america is such that a qualified surgeon may be years away from obtaining such a post  many doctors previously obtained these qualifications in the senior house officer grade  and remained in that grade when they began sub-specialty training. the distinction of mr (etc.) is also used by surgeons in the republic of ireland  some states of australia  barbados  new zealand  south africa  zimbabwe  and some other commonwealth countries.   == military titles == in many english-speaking countries the military title of surgeon is applied to any medical practitioner  due to the historical evolution of the term. the us army medical corps retains various surgeon mos  in the ranks of officer pay grades for military personnel dedicated to performing surgery on wounded soldiers.   == specialties ==  some physicians who are general practitioners or specialists in family medicine or emergency medicine may perform limited ranges of minor  common  or emergency surgery. anesthesia often accompanies surgery  and anesthesiologists and nurse anesthetists may oversee this aspect of surgery. surgeon s assistant  surgical nurses  surgical technologists are trained professionals who support surgeons. in the united states  the department of labor description of a surgeon is  a physician who treats diseases  injuries  and deformities by invasive  minimally-invasive  or non-invasive surgical methods  such as using instruments  appliances  or by manual manipulation .   == pioneer surgeons ==  sushruta (the first to document an operation of open rhinoplasty) al-zahrawi  regarded as one of the greatest medieval surgeons and a father of surgery. ) charles kelman (invented phacoemulsification  the technique of modern cataract surgery) william stewart halsted (initiated surgical residency training in u.s.  pioneer in many fields) alfred blalock (first modern day successful open heart surgery in 1944) c. walton lillehei (labeled  father of modern day open heart surgery ) christiaan barnard (cardiac surgery  first heart transplantation) victor chang australian pioneer of heart transplantation john hunter (scottish  viewed as the father of modern surgery  performed hundreds of dissections  served as the model for dr. jekyll.) sir victor horsley (neurosurgery) lars leksell (neurosurgery  inventor of radiosurgery) joseph lister (discoverer of surgical sepsis  listerine named in his honour) harvey cushing (pioneer  and often considered the father of  modern neurosurgery) paul tessier (french surgeon  father of craniofacial surgery) gholam a. peyman (inventor of lasik ) ioannis pallikaris (greek surgeon. performed the first lasik procedure on a human eye. developed epi-lasik.) nikolay pirogov (the founder of field surgery) valery shumakov (pioneer of artificial organs implantation) svyatoslav fyodorov (creator of radial keratotomy) gazi yasargil (turkish neurosurgeon  founder of microneurosurgery) rene favaloro (first surgeon to perform bypass surgery) michael r. harrison (pioneer of fetal surgery) michael debakey (educator and innovator in the field of cardiac surgery) fidel pagés (pioneer of epidural anesthesia) wilder penfield (neurosurgery) harold gillies (pioneer of plastic surgery) maria
siemionow (pioneer of near-total face transplant surgery)   == organizations and fellowships == acfas facs fracds fracs frcs frcs (canada) frcs (edinburgh) frcsi (ireland) mrcs   == references ==
waiting staff (british english)  waitstaff (north american english)  waiters (increasingly used for women too)  or servers (gender-neutral north american english) are those who work at a restaurant or a bar  and sometimes in private homes  attending to customers by supplying them with food and drink as requested. waiting staff follow rules and guidelines determined by the manager. waiting staff carry out many different tasks  such as food-running  polishing dishes and silverware  helping bus tables  and restocking working stations with needed supplies. waiting on tables is part of the service sector and among the most common occupations in the united states. the bureau of labor statistics estimates that  as of may 2008  there were over 2.2 million people employed as servers in the u.s.many restaurants choose a specific uniform for their waiting staff to wear. waiting staff may receive tips as a minor or major part of their earnings  with customs varying widely from country to country.   == terminology == an individual waiting tables (or waiting on or waiting at tables) or waitering or waitressing is commonly called a waiter  server  front server  waitress  member of the wait staff  waitstaff  serving staff server  waitperson  or waitron. the last two terms are gender neutral but rarely used  and the terms waiter and server are increasingly used for women too. archaic terms such as serving girl  serving wench  or serving lad are generally used only within their historical context.   == duties ==  the duties of waiting staff can be tedious and challenging but are vital to the success of the restaurant. such duties include the following  preparing a section of tables before guests sit down (e.g.  changing the tablecloth  putting out new utensils  cleaning chairs  etc.)  offering cocktails  specialty drinks  wine  beer  or other beverages  recommending food options  requesting the chef to make changes in how food is prepared  pre-clearing the tables  and serving food and beverages to customers. in some higher-end restaurants  servers have a good knowledge of the wine list and can recommend food–wine pairings. at more expensive restaurants  servers memorize the ingredients of the dishes and the manner in which the food is prepared  for example  if the menu lists marinated beef  the customer might ask what the beef is marinated in  for how long  and what cut of beef is used in the dish. silver service staff are specially trained to serve at banquets or high-end restaurants. these servers follow specific rules and service guidelines  which makes this a skilled job. they generally wear black and white with a long  white apron (extending from the waist to the ankles). at expensive restaurants  waiting staff also keep blacklists of rude customers.the head server is in charge of the waiting staff and is also frequently responsible for assigning seating. the head
server must insure that all staff do their duties accordingly. the functions of a head server can overlap to some degree with that of the maître d hôtel. restaurants in north america employ an additional level of waiting staff  known as busboys or busgirls  increasingly referred to as bussers or server assistants  to clear dirty dishes  set tables  and otherwise assist the waiting staff.emotional labour is often required of waiting staff  particularly at many high-class restaurants.   == requirements ==  restaurant serving positions require on-the-job training that would be held by an upper-level server in the restaurant. the server will be trained to provide good customer service  learn food items and drinks  and maintain a neat and tidy appearance. working in a role such as captain in a top rated restaurant requires disciplined role-playing comparable to a theater performance.in the united states  some states require individuals employed to handle food and beverages to obtain a food handler s card or permit. in these states  servers that do not have a permit or handler s card can not serve. the server can achieve a permit or handler s card online. no food certification requirements are needed in canada. however  to serve alcoholic beverages in canada  servers must undergo their province s online training course within a month of being hired.   == tipping in the united states == different countries maintain different customs regarding tipping  but  in the united states  a tip paid in addition to the amount presented on the bill for food and drinks is customary. at most sit-down restaurants  servers and bartenders expect a tip after a patron has paid the check. the minimum legally required hourly wage paid to waiters and waitresses in many u.s. states is lower than the minimum wage employers are required to pay for most other forms of labor in order to account for the tips that form a significant portion of the server s income. if wages and tips do not equal the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour during any week  the employer is required to increase cash wages to compensate.tips average between 15% and 20% of the bill. 20% is expected for good service  more than 20% is expected for great service  and some patrons tip even more for exceptional service. if the server goes above and beyond to ensure the patron enjoys his meal  it is customary to give a higher tip. some restaurants charge an automatic gratuity for larger parties (usually 6 or more)  and the gratuity ranges from 15% to 20% depending on the restaurant.  the amount an establishment requires the customer to pay is a service charge.  service charges  also known as automatic gratuities  are automatically included in the check.  common examples of service charges may include   banquet event fees  hotel fees  bottle service fees  and cruise ship fees.   == see
also == bikini barista breastaurant chamberlain (office) hospitality soda jerk table service waiters  race   == references ==
a security guard (also known as a security inspector  security officer  or protective agent) is a person employed by a government or private party to protect the employing party’s assets (property  people  equipment  money  etc.) from a variety of hazards (such as waste  damaged property  unsafe worker behavior  criminal activity such as theft  etc.) by enforcing preventative measures. security guards do this by maintaining a high-visibility presence to deter illegal and inappropriate actions  looking (either directly  through patrols  or indirectly  by monitoring alarm systems or video surveillance cameras) for signs of crime or other hazards (such as a fire)  taking action to minimize damage (such as warning and escorting trespassers off property)  and reporting any incidents to their clients and emergency services (such as the police or paramedics)  as appropriate.security officers are generally uniformed to represent their lawful authority to protect private property. security guards are generally governed by legal regulations  which set out the requirements for eligibility (e.g.  a criminal record check) and the permitted authorities of a security guard in a given jurisdiction. the authorities permitted to security guards vary by country and subnational jurisdiction. security officers are hired by a range of organizations  including businesses  government departments and agencies and not-for-profit organizations (e.g.  churches and charitable organizations). until the 1980s  the term watchman was more commonly applied to this function  a usage dating back to at least the middle ages in europe where there was no form of law enforcement (other than it being a private matter). this term was carried over to north america where it was interchangeable with night-watchman [e.g. security guard] until both terms were replaced with the modern security-based titles. security officers are sometimes regarded as fulfilling a private policing function.   == functions and duties ==  many security firms and proprietary security departments practice the  detect  deter  observe and report  method. security officers are not required to make arrests  but have the authority to make a citizen s arrest  or otherwise act as an agent of law enforcement  for example  at the request of a police officer or sheriff. a private security officer s responsibility is protecting their client from a variety of hazards (usually in the form of criminal acts). security personnel enforce company rules and can act to protect lives and property  and they sometimes have a contractual obligation to provide these actions. in addition to basic deterrence  security officers are often trained to perform specialized tasks such as arrest and control (including handcuffing and restraints)  operate emergency equipment  perform first aid  cpr  take accurate notes  write detailed reports  and perform other tasks as required by the client they are serving. all security officers are also required to go through additional training mandated by the state for the carrying of weapons such as batons  firearms  and pepper spray
(e.g. the bureau of security and investigative services in california has requirements that a license for each item listed must be carried while on duty). some officers are required to complete police certification for special duties. the number of jobs is expected to grow in the u.s.  with 175 000 new security jobs expected before 2016. in recent years  due to elevated threats of terrorism  most security officers are required to have bomb-threat training and/or emergency crisis training  especially those located in soft target areas such as shopping malls  schools  and any other area where the general public congregate. one major economic justification for security personnel is that insurance companies (particularly fire insurance carriers) will give substantial rate discounts to sites which have a 24-hour presence. for a high risk or high value property  the discount can often exceed the money being spent on its security program.  discounts are offered because having security on site increases the odds that any fire will be noticed and reported to the local fire department before a total loss occurs.  also  the presence of security officers (particularly in combination with effective security procedures) tends to diminish  shrinkage  theft  employee misconduct and safety rule violations  property damage  or even sabotage. many casinos hire security officers to protect money when transferring it from the casino to the casino s bank. security personnel may also perform access control at building entrances and vehicle gates  meaning  they ensure that employees and visitors display proper passes or identification before entering the facility. security officers are called upon to respond to potential hazards (such as broken lights or doors  disturbances  lost persons  minor injuries  etc.) and to assist in serious emergencies (medicals  fires  crime  etc.) by securing the scene to prevent further loss or damage  summoning emergency responders to the incident  helping to redirect foot traffic to safe locations  and by documenting what happened on an incident report to give their client an idea of how to prevent similar situations from occurring. armed security officers are frequently contracted to respond as law enforcement until a given situation at a client location is under control and/or public authorities arrive on the scene. patrolling is usually a large part of a security officer s duties  as most incidents are prevented by being looked for instead of waiting for them to occur. often these patrols are logged by use of a guard tour patrol system  which require regular patrols. until recently the most commonly used form used to be mechanical clock systems that required a key for manual punching of a number to a strip of paper inside with the time pre-printed on it.  but recently  electronic systems have risen in popularity due to their light weight  ease of use  and downloadable logging capabilities. regular patrols are  however  becoming less accepted as an industry standard  as it provides predictability
for the would-be criminal  as well as monotony for the security officer on duty. random patrols are easily programmed into electronic systems  allowing greater freedom of movement and unpredictability. global positioning systems are beginning to be used because they are a more effective means of tracking officers  movements and behavior.   == personnel == although security officers differ from police officers  military personnel  federal agents/officers  and the like  australia and the united states have a growing proportion of security personnel that have former police or military experience  including senior management personnel. on the other hand  some security officers  young people in particular  use the job as practical experience to use in applying to law enforcement agencies.   === types of personnel and companies ===  security personnel are classified as one of the following    in-house  or  proprietary  (i.e. employed by the same company or organization they protect  such as a mall  theme park  or casino)  formerly often called works police or security police in the united kingdom.  security supervisor  meets with clients and employees as necessary to ensure client and employee satisfaction.  scheduler  security officer assignment and strategic scheduling resulting in client satisfaction  employee retention and cost maintained within district financial plans.  human resources manager  effective delivery of human resources services such as employment  employee/labor relations  compensation  benefits administration  training and development  workers’ compensation  and audit compliance. maintains and implements corporate policies and programs related to employment.  client service manager  promotes financial growth for the district by ensuring client retention  security officer retention  and support for the development of new business.  client service supervisor  provides security services for designated clients resulting in customer satisfaction  security officer retention  and financial growth for the district. provides service in a large and complex area.  contract  working for a private security company which protects many locations.  public security  a person employed or appointed as an (usually armed) security officer by a government or government agency.  private police officers  or  special police .  private patrol officers  vehicle patrol officers that protect multiple client premises.  parapolice  aggressive firms that routinely engage in criminal investigation and arrest.industry terms for security personnel include  security guard  security officer  security agent  safety patrol  private police  company police  security enforcement officer  and public safety. terms for specialized jobs include usher  bouncer  bodyguards  executive protection agent  loss prevention  alarm responder  hospital security officer  mall security officer  crime prevention officer  patrolman  private patrol officer  and private patrol operator.  state and local governments sometimes regulate the use of these terms by law—for example  certain words and phrases that  give an impression that he or she is connected in any
way with the federal government  a state government  or any political subdivision of a state government  are forbidden for use by california security licensees by business and professions code section 7582.26. so the terms  private homicide police  or  special agent  would be unlawful for a security licensee to use in california. similarly  in canada  various acts specifically prohibits private security personnel from using the terms probation officer  law enforcement  police  or police officer. alberta and ontario prohibit the use of the term security officer  which has been in widespread use in the united states for many decades. recent changes to the act have also introduced restrictions on uniform and vehicle colours and markings to make private security personnel clearly distinctive from police personnel. some sources feel that some of these restrictions are put in place to satisfy the canadian police association. specialized vip security guard services and companies are in high demand and are defined by their ability to protect celebrities and executives during times of unrest. there is a marked difference between persons performing the duties historically associated with watchmen and persons who take a more active role in protecting persons and property. the former  often called  guards  are taught the mantra  observe and report  are minimally trained  and not expected to deal with the public or confront criminals. the latter are often highly trained  sometimes armed depending on contracts agreed upon with clientele  and are more likely to interact with the general public and to confront the criminal element. these employees tend to take pride in the title  security officer  or  protection officer  and disdain the label of  guard . security jobs vary in pay and duties. there is sometimes little relationship between duties performed and compensation  for example some mall  security officers  who are exposed to serious risks earn less per hour than  industrial security guards  who have less training and responsibility. however  there are now more positions in the security role that separate not just the titles  but the job itself. the roles have progressed and so have the areas for which security people are needed. the term  agent  can be confusing in the security industry because it can describe a civil legal relationship between an employee and their employer or contractor ( agent of the owner  in california pc 602)  and also can describe a person in government service ( special agent jones of the federal bureau of investigation .) the title  agent  can be confused with bail enforcement agents  also known as  bounty hunters  who are sometimes regulated by the same agencies which regulate private security.  the term  agent  is also used in other industries  such as banking agents  loan agents and real estate agents. security agents are often employed in loss prevention and personal or executive protection (bodyguards)
roles. they typically work in plainclothes (without a uniform)  and are usually highly trained to act lawfully in direct defense of life or property. security officers are private citizens  and therefore are bound by the same laws and regulations as the citizenry they are contracted to serve  and therefore are not allowed to represent themselves as law enforcement under penalty of law.   == training ==  just as with the police profession  training requirements for the private security industry have evolved over time. for many years security officers were poorly chosen and poorly trained (if at all)  partly because security companies who contracted with clients in private industry were paid very little for their security services. for the most part  contracts were awarded to security officer companies through a competition process and the final selection was often made based on cost rather than the experience or professionalism of the security guard company. that changed drastically on september 11  2001 when radical terrorists attacked the united states. the event moved corporate threat concerns to the top of the priority list for most security guard contracts started being awarded based on professionalism. more money was invested in security so more money became available for training of security guards. the term  security professional  began to surface and large private security companies like blackwater  usa began offering training services for the private security industry that approached the level of training provided by the military. security companies began paying enough to attract people with significant backgrounds in law enforcement and the military  often in special operations.   === australia === any person who conducts a business or is employed in a security-related field within australia is required to be licensed. each of the six states and two territories of australia have separate legislation that covers all security activities. licensing management in each state/territory is varied and is carried out by either police  attorney general s department  justice department or the department of consumer affairs.  new south wales—(police) security industry act 1997 & security industry regulation 2016 victoria—(police) private security act 2004 queensland—(justice & attorney-general) security providers act 1993 south australia—(consumer & business affairs) security and investigation agents act 1995 western australia—(police) security & related activities (control) act 1996 & security & related activities (control) regulations 1997 tasmania—(police) *security and investigation agents act 2002 northern territory—(justice) private security act & private security (security officer/crowd controller/security firms/miscellaneous matters) regulations  australian capital territory—(regulatory services) security industry act 2003 & security industry regulation 2003all of this legislation was intended to enhance the integrity of the private security industry. all persons licensed to perform security activities are required to undertake a course of professional development in associated streams that are recognised nationally. this has not always been the case and the introduction of this requirement is expected to regulate the educational standards and knowledge base so that the particular job can be competently performed. strict requirements are laid down as to the type of
uniform and badge used by security companies. uniforms or badges that may be confused with a police officer are prohibited. also  the use of the titles  security police  or  private detective  are unacceptable. while the term security guard is used by companies  government bodies and individuals  the term security officer is deemed more suitable. bouncers use the title crowd controllers  and store detectives use the title loss prevention or asset protection officers. security officers may carry firearms  handcuffs or batons where their role requires them to do so and then only when working and have the appropriate sub-class accreditation to their license.   ==== notable security companies in australia ==== mss security (sis group)  snp security (certis group) wilson security securitas prosgeur chubb security (utc) iss security armaguard (linfox proprietary limited)   ==== private security trends in australia ==== a 2009 review of trends in private security in australia  conducted by tim prenzler  karen earle and rick sarre  published by the australian institute of criminology  sought to examine the size and scope of the private security industry in australia to help inform efforts to develop national consistent standards and licensing regimes.the review found the industry had a similar gender profile to police (24% female  76% male)  however security had a wider  and older age profile - 35% of security officers were 45 to 64 years old  while 44% of police were concentrated between 30 and 39 years. the review noted that as of 2009  private security outnumbered police two to one  it expected that this rate would continue to slow as security technology become more readily-accessible  especially cctv camera systems  which are often seen as being more cost-effective than guarding/mobile patrol service.the review referenced a 2007 report from ibisworld (2007 24) that indicated four out of five of the largest private security companies in australia were foreign-owned  accounting for 44.5% of the market share at the time.a 2018 report authored by anthony bergin  donald williams  and christopher dixon and published by the australian strategic policy institute  focused on the current role of private security in countering hostile threats. an evolving understanding of threats has resulted in private security playing a greater part in responding to critical incidents  such as terrorist attacks.the report provided a low end estimate of the total number of licensed security personnel across australia as 120 000 (54 753 employed full-time  up from 52 768 in 2006). it said the security industry is nationally characterized as high-volume and high-turnover  given the conflict between a highly prescriptive selection process by employers and regulators who seek to ensure only fit and proper people are licensed. as such  approximately 47% of the industry consists of casual security officers. in 2018  referencing data provided by asial  the report states that the private security industry has an annual turnover of aud8 billion - split evenly between manpower and the electronics
sector. despite various companies being amalgamated or split up  there continues to be a high rate of foreign-ownership of major security providers  the industry overall however remains split between a small number of national companies and a large number of small  specialized businesses. technological advancements in regards to drones  facial recognition  and robotics are expected to continue to augment the private security landscape in australia.   === canada ===  in canada  private security falls under the jurisdiction of canada s ten provinces and three territories. all ten of canada s provinces and one of its territories (the yukon) have legislation that regulates the contract security industry. these eleven jurisdictions require that companies that provide security guard services and their employees be licensed. most provinces in canada regulate the use of handcuffs and weapons (such as firearms and batons) by contract security companies and their employees  either banning such use completely or permitting it only under certain circumstances. additionally  in some provinces  some terms  or variations of them  are prohibited either on a uniform or in self-reference.canada s federal laws also restrict the ability of security officers to be armed. for example  section 17 of the firearms act makes it an offense for any person  including a security officer  to possess prohibited or restricted firearms (i.e. handguns) anywhere outside of his or her home. there are two exceptions to this prohibition found in sections 18 and 19 of the act. section 18 deals with transportation of firearms while section 19 deals with allowing persons to carry such firearms on their persons to protect their lives or the lives of other persons  or for the performance of their occupation (armour car guards  licensed trappers)  provided an authorization to carry (atc) is first obtained.   ==== british columbia ==== private security in the province of british columbia is governed by two pieces of legislation  the security services act and the security services regulation. these laws are administered and enforced by the security programs and police technology division of the ministry of public safety and solicitor general. the legislation requires that guards must be at least 19 years old  undergo a criminal background check  and successfully complete a training course. as far as weapons  british columbia law severely restricts their use by security officers. section 11(1)(c) of the security services regulation prohibits security personnel from carrying or using any  item designed for debilitating or controlling a person or animal  which the government interprets to include all weapons. as well  section 11 forbids private security from using or carrying restraints  such as handcuffs  unless authorized by the government. however  as in other parts of canada  armoured car officers are permitted to carry firearms. in the past  only personnel that worked for contract security  that is  security companies  were regulated in british columbia. however  as of september 1  2009  in-house
security officers and private investigators came under the jurisdiction of the security services act and security services regulation. bodyguards and bouncers  effective november 1  2009  are also subject to these regulations.   === europe ===  armed private security officers are much rarer in europe  and illegal in many countries  such as the united kingdom and the netherlands. in developing countries (with host country permission)  an armed security force composed mostly of ex-military personnel is often used to protect corporate assets  particularly in war-torn regions. as a requirement of the private security industry act 2001  the uk now requires all contract security officers to have a valid security industry authority license. the licence must be displayed when on duty  although a dispensation may be granted for store detectives  bodyguards and others who need to operate without being identified as a security guard. this dispensation is not available to vehicle immobilisers. licenses are valid for three years and require the holders to undergo formal training  and are also to pass mandatory criminal records bureau checks. licences for vehicle immobilisers are valid for one year. armed guarding and guarding with a weapon are illegal. in finland  all contract security officers are required to have a valid license granted by police. temporary license is valid for four months and normal license for five years. license requires a minimum 40-hour course for temporary license and 80 hours more for a normal license. additionally a narrow security vetting is required. the 40-hour course does not allow the guard to carry any kind of special equipment such as a baton or handcuffs. guards have to complete the 80-hour course to carry these. separate training and license is required for the security guard to carry pepper spray  extendable baton or a firearm. rehearse of weapons usage is mandatory every year and is regulated by the ministry of the interior  to ensure the safe handling of pepper spray and such. firearms can only be carried by bodyguards and cash-in-transit guards or when guarding a person or object that is significant in terms of public interest. in finland  a security guard has the right to detain a person  red-handed  or seen committing a crime and the right to search the detained individual for harmful items and weapons. an individual who has been forcefully detained can only be released by the police. all companies providing security guarding services are also required to have a valid license from the ministry of the interior.in the netherlands  security officers (beveiligingsbeambte) must undergo a criminal background check by the local police department in the area where the private security company is located. to become a security guard in the netherlands  a person must complete the basic training level 2 beveiliger2. to complete the training a trainee must undergo a three-month internship with a private security company that is licensed by the svpb  the board that controls security exams. a trainee guard must pass for his
diploma within one year. if the trainee does not pass he is not allowed to work anymore until he completes his training with a positive result. after a positive result a new id can be issued and is valid for three years  after which the officer must undergo a background check by the local police again. security officers in the netherlands are not allowed to carry any kind of weapon or handcuffs. every uniformed security guard in the netherlands must have the v symbol on his or her uniform to advise the public they are dealing with a private guard  this rule is mandated by the ministry of justice. security uniforms may not look like similar to police uniforms  and may not contain any kind of rank designation. the colors yellow and gold are not allowed to be used because the dutch police uses gold accents in their uniforms  also  wearing a uniform cap is not allowed. every new uniform design or addition must be approved by the ministry of justice before use. a patrol vehicle may not look like a police striped vehicle. the only private security officers who are allowed to carry firearms are those who work for the military or dutch national bank (de nederlandsche bank)  this is where the national gold reserve can be found.   ==== norway ==== in norway security officers are called  vektere . there are two different types of vektere—the normal uniformed or civil-clothing officers who watch over private and semi-public properties  and government-hired vektere who work in public places  such as the parliament. the law provides more enforcement powers to security officers in the parliament than to private security officers. security officers must undergo three weeks of training and internship. they are allowed to work for six months after one week of the introduction course. it is also possible to choose security as a high school major  which requires two years of school and two years of trainee positions at private companies  resulting in a certificate from the government. this certificate makes it easier to get a job  with slightly higher pay. it also makes it easier to get a job elsewhere in the security industry. the certificate can also be obtained by private security officers who have had a minimum of 5 years working experience. no security officer may carry pepper spray  batons or any other kind of weapon. however  handcuffs may be used. norges bank (bank of norway  federal reserves) had armed government guards until late 2013  when they were disarmed by the minister of finance. security officers serving on ships sailing in areas of high piracy risk may be equipped with firearms. uniforms should not resemble police worn attire  but some uniforms do. the uniform must have the text  vekter  or  sikkerhet  above the left shirt pocket. a security officer  or any other person  may detain or arrest anyone that violates any law  as long
as the violation carries a punishment of minimum six (6) months imprisonment and a fine. the detainee must be released or handed over to the authorities within 4 hours of the arrest. security officers assigned to public transportation  such as trains  subways  trams and buses  also have some powers under the transportloven (transportation law). security officers may issue fixed penalty tickets for violation of parking regulations in designated areas and for passengers on public transportation without a valid pass. a security officer may only search (frisk) a person to prevent the use of or confiscate any type of weapon or anything that can be used as a weapon. in 2006  some security officers (vakt service/nokas) were given extended training and limited police authority to transport prisoners between police holding cells  jails and courts  etc. due to an outcry from the police union  this program was scrapped after a few months. in addition to normal  vektere  there also is a special branch for  ordensvakter  who normally work as bouncers or security at concerts and similar types of events. ordensvakter have to undergo an extra week of training to learn techniques on how to handle drunk people and people on various drugs. they also learn about the alcohol laws of norway (which are rather strict). the police in the local police district must approve each ordensvakt. these special regulations arose after events in the 1990s when bouncers had a bad reputation  especially in oslo  for being too brutal and rough with people. at that time  the police had no control over who worked as bouncers. after the government implemented training and mandatory police-issued id cards for bouncers the problems have been reduced. the police of oslo report that ordensvakter are now helping the police identify crimes that otherwise would not be reported. in 2013  due to a high number of rapes and violent robberies  the city of oslo (oslo kommune) hired a private security company (metro garda) to patrol the downtown immigrant areas. this patrol had a positive effect  and the city has  in addition to metro garda officers  now hired their own officers called bymiljøetaten (city environment dep). the municipalities in norway are not allowed to form their own  police . the only police force in norway is the federal police (politi). in 2007  several officers from the securitas ab company were arrested for brutality against a robber they apprehended on the main street of oslo. the crime was captured with a mobile camera by pedestrians and created a public outcry  with many objecting to the way the security guards took the law into their own hands. later  it came to light that the thief first attacked the security guards when they approached him  so the brutality charges were dropped. as a result of this episode  the police said that they would be more careful when conducting criminal background checks for security guards. before 2007 security guards
were checked when they applied for a job  but not while they were working. security companies were also criticized for not checking criminal records sufficiently  in some cases not at all. now guards working in private security must be checked annually. the police have the authority to withdraw a company s licence if the company does not submit lists of employees to the police. the police in norway were widely criticized for not checking guards properly  and even when they encounter an issue with a guard  the guard can still work for months before anything is done. the security company g4s  after being criticized by police for hiring criminals  stated that they cannot do anything about the problem  because only the police have the ability to check the guard s criminal records.in 2012  norwegian media reported that off-duty police officers and home guard soldiers had contracts of armed employment on civilian ships in the aden bay  and police leaders were planning sanctions against the use of police officers. today there are around 15 000 people working in private security in norway. the police have around 10 000 employees in total. notable companies operating in norway   g4s infratek iss a/s (formerly personellsikring) metro garda nokas prosec—professional security (mainly event security) securitas   === hong kong ===  in hong kong  the term security officer refers to a senior staff member who supervises a team of security personnel. the staff who work under security officers  supervision are called security guards.   ==== legislation ==== before 1 october 1996  private security personnel were regulated by the watchmen ordinance (chapter 299). however  there were many problems with that system of regulation—for example  there were no restrictions as to whom may establish private security service companies to provide security services to a client. also  there was no regulation of people whom may perform installation of security systems. some employers hired  caretakers  instead of security guards to avoid their responsibilities under the ordinance (in formal definition   caretakers  are supposed to provide facilities management service  although security service  which provided to residential properties  takes some parts of facilities management service). as a result  the hong kong government enacted a wholly new law  the security and guarding services ordinance (chapter 460)  to replace the watchmen ordinance. according to the security and guarding services ordinance  no individual shall do  agree to do  or hold himself/herself out as doing  or as available to do  security work for another person unless he/she does so-  under and in accordance with a permit  or otherwise than for reward.security work means any of the following activities-  guarding any property  guarding any person or place for the purpose of preventing or detecting the occurrence of any offence  (replaced 25 of 2000 s. 2) installing  maintaining or repairing a security device  designing for any particular premises
or place a system incorporating a security device.security device means a device designed or adapted to be installed in any premises or place  except on or in a vehicle  for the purpose of detecting or recording- (amended 25 of 2000 s. 2)  the occurrence of any offence  or the presence of an intruder or of an object that persons are  for reasons of security  not permitted to bring onto the premises or place or any other premises or place.   == qualification == qualification for security guards vary from country to country. different requirements have to be completed before applying for this job.   === hong kong ===  any applicant who wishes to apply for a security personnel permit (spp) must   he/she have been living in hong kong for at least 5 years. (this requirement may have been changed) no criminal record. at least 17 years old when submitting his/her application. have passed a mandatory 16-hour training course and have been granted a certificate of the course. if the applicant is over 65 years old  he/she must submit his/her health examination report.   ==== permit ==== security personnel permit was separated to four types  a  b  c  and d.  type a permit holder was permitted to work in a  single-block  residential building  they are not allowed to carry firearms. no age limit. type b permit holder was permitted to work in any type of properties  but they also are not allowed carry firearms. the maximum age limit of this permit is 65. type c permit holder was permitted to work as an armed guard. (usually  they are members of the cash transport car crew.) the maximum age limit of this permit is 55. type d permit holder was permitted to design  install  and repair security devices. no maximum age limit.the permit is valid for five years. all holders must renew their permit before it expires  or they will lose their qualification to work  as such  until their permit is renewed. the type a and type b security service are gradually combined with property management service  though the boundary between these two industries is unclear.   ==== power of arrest ==== security guards in hong kong do not have special powers of arrest above that of the ordinary citizen  i.e. citizen s arrest  also known locally as the  101 arrest power . the section 101 in the criminal procedure ordinance addresses that arrest of an offender by a private citizen is allowed in certain circumstances if the offender is attempting an arrestable offense. once arrested  the suspect must be delivered to a police office as soon as possible. an arrestable offence is defined as any crime carrying a sentence of more than 12 months imprisonment. no security personnel are allowed to search other person  nor are they allowed to get personal information from other people  with the
exception of some specific circumstances.   === israel === in israel  almost all security guards carry a firearm  primarily to prevent terror attacks. security guards are common  they perform entrance checks at shopping malls  transportation terminals  government and other office buildings  and many stores. many locations with a high number of visitors  such as the jerusalem central bus station  employ x-ray machines to check passenger s bags  in other places  they are opened and visually inspected. since 2009  private security guards companies as mikud have also replaced official security forces at some checkpoints inside and on the border of the west bank  as well as the crossings to gaza.   === malaysia === the private security industry is regulated by the ministry of home affairs (kementerian dalam negeri). as of 2018  all private security companies in malaysia must have a minimum of 80% of their employees complete a certified security guard training course  in order to receive approval to renew their private agency license. peninsular malaysia allows for the use of nepalese security guards whereby east malaysian immigration policy does not allow the use of foreign workers to be employed in the security industry.   === south africa ===  security guards along with the rest of the private security industry are regulated under act 56 of 2001  private security industry regulation act.   === united states === private security guards have outnumbered police officers since the 1980s  predating the heightened concern about security brought on by the september 11  2001  attacks. the more than 1 million contract security officers  and an equal number of guards estimated to work directly for u.s. corporations  is much greater than the nearly 700 000 sworn law enforcement officers in the united states. most states require a license to work as a security officer. this license may include a criminal background check or mandated training requirements. security guards have the same powers of arrest as a private citizen  called a  private person  arrest   any person  arrest  or  citizen s arrest . if weapons are carried  additional permits and training are usually required. armed security personnel are generally employed to protect sensitive sites such as government and military installations  armored money transports  casinos  banks and other financial institutions  and nuclear power plants. however  armed security is quickly becoming a standard for vehicle patrol officers and on many other non-government sites. in some states  companies are developing technology to enhance private security. using behavior analysis  computers can detect threats more quickly with fewer errors in judgement. using specific algorithms  a computer can now detect aggressive and defensive body language  which triggers an alert to security or proper authorities depending on the event. these systems can also track slips and falls  theft and other events commonly experienced in corporate america. the responsibilities of security guards in
the united states are expanding in scope. for example  a trend is the increasing use of private security to support services previously provided by police departments. james f. pastor addresses substantive legal and public policy issues which directly or indirectly relate to the provision of security services. these can be demonstrated by the logic of alternative or supplemental service providers. the use of private police has particular appeal because property or business owners can directly contract for public safety services  thereby providing welcome relief for municipal budgets. finally  private police functions can be flexible  depending upon the financial  organizational  political  and circumstances of the client.arizona — licensed security companies are required to provide eight hours of pre-assignment training to all persons employed as security guards before the employee acts in the capacity of a security guard. there is a state-mandated curriculum that must be taught  and subjects covered must include criminal law and laws of arrest  uniforms and grooming  communications  use of force  general security procedures  crime scene preservation  ethics  and first response.  california — security guards are required to obtain a license from the bureau of security and investigative services (bsis)  of the california department of consumer affairs. applicants must be at least 18 years old  undergo a criminal history background check through the california department of justice (doj) and the federal bureau of investigation (fbi)  and complete a 40-hour course of required training. this required training is broken down into smaller training sections and time-lines. the first is 8 hours of bsis-designed instruction on powers to arrest and weapons. then  within 30 days of getting the individual officers license  they must receive 16 hours of training on various mandatory and elective courses. finally  within 6 months of getting their license  they must receive an additional 16 hours of training on various mandatory and elective courses. california security officers are also required to complete 8 hours of annual training on security-related topics  in addition to the initial 40 hours of training. the training and exam may be administered by any private patrol operator or by any of a large number of certified training facilities. this training can be in the classroom or online.new jersey — as of 2006 all security personnel employed by a  security officer company  which provides security services to other entities by contract must undergo a state mandated certified training program. this law  commonly referred to as sora  is the state s effort to increase the quality of security personnel. security personnel employed by other types of businesses do not require the sora certification card. however  those employed by the atlantic city casinos are required to have the state issued  casino employee registration  card. new mexico — as of 2008 all security guards must undergo fbi background checks and a certified training program. guards who carry firearms must also undergo additional training with a firearm through an
approved firearms instructor and pass a psychological exam. the security industry is regulated through the new mexico regulation and licensing division. north carolina — security officers in north carolina are required to register and become certified with the private protective services board (ppsb)  the private security authority body under the north carolina department of justice. the purpose of the private protective services board is to administer the licensing  education and training requirements for persons  firms  associations and corporations engaged in private protective services within north carolina. the board is totally fee funded and is staffed by departmental employees directed on a daily basis by the director  who is appointed by the attorney general. there are two classifications for an officer  armed and unarmed. while an unarmed officer is required to take a 16-hour class of training and instruction to become certified  an armed officer must take additional hours of classroom training as well as qualify on a gun range with the firearm which will be carried on duty. oklahoma — security officers in oklahoma are licensed by cleet (council on law enforcement education and training). to be licensed as an unarmed officer an individual must be at least 18 years of age and undergo 40 hours of classroom training and pass criminal history checks. armed guards must be 21 years of age  have another 40 hours of classroom training  qualify with their firearm and pass a psychological evaluation. oregon — department of public safety  standards and training pennsylvania — no licensing requirements to be an unarmed security guard. however  anyone who carried a firearm or other  lethal weapon  in the course and scope of their employment must be trained as a  certified agent  and successfully complete a 40-hour training course (including shooting range time) in order to be certified to carry weapons while on duty under the lethal weapons training act (commonly referred to as act 235 certification). certification involves completing a medical physical exam  a psychological examination  classroom training and qualifying on a pistol range  with firing of 50 rounds of ammo larger than a .380acp. agents are also required to qualify on a shotgun. the certification is good for five years at which time an eight-hour refresher course must be taken or the certification is revoked.south carolina — all security officers have the same authority and power of arrest as sheriff s deputies  while on the property they are paid to protect  and according to attorney general alan wilson  are considered law enforcement for the purpose of making arrests and swearing out a warrant before the magistrate. private officers may respond to calls for service  make arrests and use blue lights and traffic radar. they may also be specially authorized by the state law enforcement division (sled) to issue uniform traffic tickets to violators. security officers are licensed or registered (as appropriate) by sled for one year at a time. training for unarmed officers is 8 hours 
an additional 8 hours is required for a security weapons permit or a concealed security weapons permit. additional hours are required to be documented for officers issuing public or private tickets as well as officers who will be using batons  pepper spray or tasers.  virginia — since the 1980s  security officers in virginia are required to be certified by dcjs (department of criminal justice services  the same agency that certifies law enforcement officers). to be certified as an unarmed security officer one must go through 18 hours of classroom training from a certified instructor in order to obtain this card and it must be done by the end of their 90 days after hire with a security company. every two years the card must be renewed  by completing an in-service with a certified instructor. to be certified as an armed security officer one must complete an additional 24 hours of firearms training  8 hours of training in conducting a lawful arrest  and qualification with the type and caliber of weapon they intend to carry. firearms endorsements must be renewed annually by completing an in-service and passing a firearms qualification. certified armed security officers are authorized under state code to arrest for any offense committed in their presence while they are on duty at the location they are hired to protect. unarmed officers have no arrest powers. they also are granted the authority by the state law to issue summons to appear in court for felonies and misdemeanors. virginia also allows security officers to attend additional 40 hours of training to become certified as conservators of the peace (special police) for the company employing them. this appointment is performed by a circuit court judge  wherein the officer is actually sworn in and has the powers of a police officer on property they are working  as well as the lawful duty to act upon witnessing any felony and the ability to pursue fleeing felons. such sworn officers are also permitted the use of sirens and red lights. those who handle k-9s  work as dispatchers  alarm responders  private investigators  instructors  bounty hunters  armored car couriers and executive protection specialists are other categories of training regulated by dcjs with additional training requirements. all positions require state police and fbi background checks. st. louis  missouri — security officers are required to be licensed by the st. louis county police department or st. louis police department. st. louis county security officer training is a two-day class and yearly renewal class. armed officers must shoot bi-annually to keep their armed status. county license is called a metropolitan license  meaning it is good for st. louis city and county. the st. louis city web site has all the information regarding licensing requirements  as they are the same in the city and county.texas — there are three types of security officer license types in the state of texas. each requires a certain level of training. all training and licensing is regulated by the
department of public safety s private security bureau. the three types of licenses are  non commissioned security officer (level ii) a non commissioned security officer is unarmed and must wear a distinctive dps approved uniform. the main purpose of this type of officer is the phrase most associated with security  observe and report. the security officer is generally there to be a good witness.required training  level ii/non commissioned officer requires 6 hours of classroom based training. this course may be taught by any licensed company directly to new hires. the owner  qualified manager  or a designee of the qualified manager may teach the course. at the completion of the course the candidate must pass a multiple choice exam. there are no pre requisites to this course or license. background check  fbi background check and electronic fingerprint imaging renewal  submission of renewal fee every two years. no required renewal course.commissioned security officer (level iii)  a commissioned security officer openly carries a handgun  and may also carry a baton  chemical dispensing device (oc)  taser  etc. commissioned officers also must wear a distinct dps approved uniform  and can at no time conceal their weapon while on duty and/or in uniform. the main purpose of this type of officer is to actively prevent and deter crime. observe and report is now a secondary function and the officer is to actively protect the clients and property in accordance with clients procedures as well as state/federal law.required training  level iii/commissioned officer requires a 40-hour level iii course. the training for this license consists of classroom based learning  defense tactics  handcuffing  and firearms training. at the completion of the course the candidate must pass a firearms proficiency test and a multiple choice exam. this license requires the previous level ii course to be completed first. this course may only be taught by a licensed level iii instructor working under a state licensed level iii security training school. background check  fbi background check and electronic fingerprint imaging renewal  submission of renewal fee and proof of completion of a 6-hour re-qualification class taught by a level iii instructor under a level iii training school. the re-qualification course requires completion of a multiple choice exam and a firearms qualification. this is done every two years.personal protection officer (level iv) a personal protection officer (ppo) directly protects the life of their client. ppo s are the only license type able to wear plain clothes while working. ppo s in plain clothes must conceal their firearm  and they are also the only license type able to conceal their firearm at all. the level iv/personal protection officer license is tied to the level iii/commissioned officer license. to issue a ppo license the ppo candidate must be applying for at the same time or have already received a level iii/ commissioned security officer license. the security officer s level iii and iv will also have the same expiration date regardless of date issued.required training  level
iv/ personal protection officer requires a 15 hours course teaching additional law  defense tactics  considerations for personal protection of a client  and oc training. this license requires the previous level ii and level iii courses to be completed first. this course may only be taught by a licensed level iv instructor working under a state licensed level iv security training school. background check  fbi background check and electronic fingerprint imaging psychological testing  in addition to the training and background check a ppo must also submit an mmpi (psychological test) administered by a texas licensed psychologist. renewal  submission of renewal fee and a current level iii/ commissioned officer license or pending renewal of level iii/commissioned officer license.new orleans  louisiana - the city of new orleans department of police in accordance with new orleans home rule charter section 4-502 (2) (a) (b) and new orleans municipal code 17-271 mcs 90-86  deputizes armed security officers  private investigators  college campus police  city  state  and federal agencies  within the city limits  with limited police power as new orleans police special officers. new orleans municipal code 17-271 mcs 30-1122 states it shall be unlawful for any person to act as an armed guard unless he is a peace officer. louisiana r.s. 40 1379.1 (b) states the special officer  when performing those tasks requiring a special officer s commission  shall have the same powers and duties as a peace officer. special officers may make arrest for felony or misdemeanor offenses on the property or area they are to protect  patrol  or in relation to their direct assignment. the special officer when making an arrest may pat down the arrested subject for weapons. special officers are to turn over arrested subjects and pertaining evidence to a new orleans police officer. special officers or to honor all subpoenas on arrest made and appear in court to testify. special officers when not on a particular assignment are regarded as private citizens and have no police power. however  special officers still may make an arrest for a felony  whether in or out of his presence  while not on a particular assignment  under louisiana law ccrp art.214 arrest by private person  when lawful.   == security officers and the police == security personnel are not police officers  unless they are security police. security personnel derive their powers from state or provincial laws  which allow them a contractual arrangement with clients that give them agent of the owner powers. this includes a nearly unlimited power to question with the absence of probable cause requirements that frequently dog public law enforcement officers. in essence  security officers keep private property / persons safe from hazards  whereas police officers protect entire communities by enforcing laws and arresting suspected offenders. some jurisdictions do commission or deputize security officers and give them limited additional powers  particularly when employed in protecting public property such as mass transit stations. this is a
special case that is often unique to a particular jurisdiction or locale. additionally  security officers may also be called upon to act as an agent of law enforcement if a police officer  sheriff s deputy  etc. is in immediate need of help and has no available backup. some security officers do have reserve police powers and are typically employed directly by governmental agencies. typically  these are sworn law enforcement personnel whose duties primarily involve the security of a government installation  and are also a special case. other local and state governments occasionally enter into special contracts with security agencies to provide patrol services in public areas. these personnel are sometimes referred to as  private police officers . sometimes  police officers work as security personnel while not on duty. this is usually done for extra income  and work is particularly done in hazardous jobs such as bodyguard work and bouncers outside nightclubs. police are called in when a situation warrants a higher degree of authority to act upon reported observations that security does not have the authority to act upon. however  some states allow licensed security officers full arrest powers equal to those of a sheriff s deputy. in 1976  the law enforcement assistance administration s national advisory commission on criminal justice standards and goals reported   one massive resource  filled with significant numbers of personnel  armed with a wide array of technology  and directed by professionals who have spent their entire adult lifetimes learning how to prevent and reduce crime  has not been tapped by governments in the fight against criminality. the private security industry  with over one million workers  sophisticated alarm systems and perimeter safeguards  armored trucks  sophisticated mini-computers  and thousands of highly skilled crime prevention experts  offers a potential for coping with crime that can not be equalled by any other remedy or approach.... underutilized by police  all but ignored by prosecutors and the judiciary  and unknown to corrections officials  the private security professional may be the only person in this society who has the knowledge to effectively prevent crime. in new york city  the area police/private security liaison program was organized in 1986 by the nypd commissioner and four former police chiefs working in the private security industry to promote mutual respect  cross-training  and sharing of crime-related information between public police and private security.   == trends ==   === australia === private security personnel initially outnumbered police. from the australian bureau of statistics report in 2006 there were 52 768 full-time security officers in the security industry compared to 44 898 police officers. but since security industry regulation act 2007 it has dropped to less than half that.   === united kingdom === the trend in the uk at the time of writing (march 2008) is one of polarisation. the market in manned guarding (the security industry term for the security guards most people are familiar with) is
diverging toward two opposite extremes  one typified by a highly trained and well paid security officer  the other with security officers on or about minimum wage with only the minimum training required by law. within the  in-house  sector  where security personnel are not subject to licensing under the private security industry act 2001  the same divergence can be seen  with some companies opting for in-house security to maintain control of their standards  while others use it as a route to cheaper  non-regulated  security. in a very few cases  such as the northern ireland security guard service  security guards may be attested as special constables.   === united states === economist robert b. reich  in his 1991 book the work of nations  stated that in the united states  the number of private security guards and officers was comparable to the number of publicly paid police officers. he used this phenomenon as an example of the general withdrawal of the affluent from existing communities where governments provide public services. instead  the wealthy pay to provide their own premium services  through voluntary  exclusive associations. as taxpayer resistance has limited government budgets  and as the demand for secure homes in gated communities has grown  these trends have continued in the 1990s and 2000s. in the aftermath of the september 11  2001 attacks  the trend in the us is one of a quiet transformation of the role of security guards into first responders in case of a terrorist attack or major disaster. this has resulted in longer guard instruction hours  extra training in terrorism tactics and increased laws governing private security companies in some states.   == history ==  the vigiles were soldiers assigned to guard the city of rome  often credited as the origin of both security personnel and police  although their principal duty was as a fire brigade. there have been night watchmen since at least the middle ages in europe  walled cities of ancient times also had watchmen. a special chair appeared in europe sometime in the late middle ages  called the watchman s chair  this unupholstered wooden chair had a forward slanting seat to prevent the watchman from dozing off during duty.   == notable individuals == in june 1972  frank wills  a security guard at the watergate office complex in washington  d.c.  noticed a piece of tape covering the latch on an entrance to one of the buildings  thereby preventing it from locking. police  whom wills subsequently notified  arrested five men in the portion of the building occupied by the democratic national committee (dnc) headquarters. the following investigations and revelations — entirely enabled by wills  discoveries and subsequent actions — ultimately led to the resignation of president richard nixon in what is now infamously known as the watergate scandal  considered by many to be the largest political scandal in the history
of the united states. christoph meili  night guard at a swiss bank  became a whistle blower in 1997. he told about the bank destroying records related to funds of holocaust victims  whose money the bank was supposed to return to their heirs. in 1999  pierlucio tinazzi rescued 10 victims from the mont blanc tunnel fire  before dying while trying to rescue an eleventh. in 2001  gary coleman  former child actor  was employed as an armed security officer  with permits valid for both firearm and baton through the bureau of security and investigative services of california in the los angeles area. while shopping for a bullet-resistant vest for his job  coleman assaulted a female autograph collector. coleman said he felt  threatened by her insistence  and punched her in the head. he was later charged for the assault and ordered to pay her $1 665 for hospital bills. this also ended up getting his guard card and firearms permits revoked  however his baton permit is still valid until the year 2045. it is unknown why the other two permits were revoked but his baton permit remains. he is not allowed to carry the baton while he is not physically working as a security officer. (firearms and baton permits issued through bsis are open carry permits  and you are required to be in uniform  and at work  on your way to or from work to carry them otherwise a separate permit must be issued by the county in california that the individual resides to carry said item off duty.) derrick brun  an unarmed security officer employed by the red lake school district in minnesota  was praised by president bush for his heroic role in protecting children during the 2005 red lake shootings   derrick s bravery cost him his life  and all americans honor him . in 2007  matthew murray fatally shot two and wounded two others at the youth with a mission retreat center in arvada  colorado. a few hours later he fatally shot two others and wounded another three in the new life church parking lot. when murray entered the church  he was met by armed security officer jeanne assam  who ordered him to drop his weapon. assam shot and wounded murray when he failed to comply. the pastor of new life church credited assam with saving over 100 lives. richard jewell  a security officer at atlanta  georgia s centennial olympic park during the 1996 summer olympics who was wrongly accused of the centennial olympic park bombing. jewell was later cleared of those charges  and was in fact the one who saved hundreds of lives when he first noticed the suspicious package and got the area evacuated. jewell later successfully sued several news agencies who reported him as the criminal prior to having the facts.   == unionization ==   === canada === many security guards in canada are unionized. the primary unions which
represent security guards in canada are the united food and commercial workers (ufcw)  local 333  and the canadian branch of the united steelworkers (usw). in contrast to the legal restrictions in the united states  canadian labour relations boards will certify bargaining units of security guards for a canadian labour congress (clc)-affiliated union or in the same union with other classifications of employees.   === united states === in june 1947  the united states congress passed the taft-hartley act placing many restrictions on labor unions. section 9 (b) (3) of the act prevents the national labor relations board (nlrb) from certifying for collective bargaining any unit which mixes security employees with non-security employees. this restricts the ability of security employees to join any union that also represents other types of employees. they may be part of an independent   security-only  union  not affiliated with any coalition of other types of labor unions such as the american federation of labor and congress of industrial organizations (afl-cio). a union which also represents non-security employees may also represent and bargain on behalf of security employees with the employer s consent. two of the largest security unions are the security  police  and fire professionals of america(spfpa) and the united government security officers of america(ugsoa).   ==== security  police  and fire professionals of america ==== in 1948 with the taft-hartley restrictions well into effect  the detroit  michigan area security guards of united auto workers (uaw) amalgamated local 114 were forced to break away and start a separate  plant guards organizing committee . the nlrb ruled that as an affiliate of the cio  the committee was indirectly affiliated with production unions and therefore ineligible for certification under the new restrictions. the committee was then forced to completely withdraw from the cio and start the independent united plant guard workers of america. by the 1990s  this union had evolved to include many other types of security officers and changed its name to the spfpa.   ==== united government security officers of america ==== in 1992  the ugsoa was formed. it specializes in organizing federal  state  and local government security officers  but since may  2000 has been open to representing other types of security personnel as well.   ==== others ==== the service employees international union (seiu) has also sought to represent security employees  although its efforts have been complicated by the taft-harley act because the seiu also represents janitors  trash collectors  and other building service employees.   == see also ==   == references ==   == external links == ontario ministry of community safety and correctional services information page on new private security legislation introduced in august  2007 uk private security industry legislation small arms survey research note  private security companies  firearms stockpiles
a bodyguard (or close protection officer) is a type of security guard  or government law enforcement officer  or soldier who protects a person or a group of people—usually high-ranking public officials or officers  wealthy people  and celebrities—from danger  generally theft  assault  kidnapping  assassination  harassment  loss of confidential information  threats  or other criminal offences. the personnel team that protects a vip is often referred to as the vip s security detail. most important public figures  such as heads of state  heads of government  and governors are protected by several bodyguards or by a team of bodyguards from a government agency  security forces  or police forces (e.g.  in the u.s.  the united states secret service or the state department s diplomatic security service).  in most countries where the head of state is also their military leader  the leader s bodyguards have traditionally been royal guards  republican guards and other elite military units. less-important public figures  or those with lower risk profiles  may be accompanied by a single bodyguard who doubles as a driver.  a number of high-profile celebrities and ceos also use bodyguards. in some countries or regions (e.g.  in latin america)  wealthy people may have a bodyguard when they travel. in some cases  the security personnel use an armoured vehicle  which protects them and the vip.   == roles ==   === popular misconceptions ===  the role of bodyguards is often misunderstood by the public  because the typical layperson s only exposure to body-guarding is usually in highly dramatized action film depictions of the profession  such as the 2018 british tv series bodyguard  in which bodyguards are depicted in firefights with attackers. in contrast to the exciting lifestyle depicted on the film screen  the role of a real-life bodyguard is much more mundane  it consists mainly of planning routes  pre-searching rooms and buildings where the client will be visiting  researching the background of people that will have contact with the client  searching vehicles  and attentively escorting the client on their day-to-day activities.   === breakdown of responsibilities === the role of a bodyguard depends on several factors. first  it depends on the role of a given bodyguard in a close protection team. a bodyguard can be a driver-bodyguard  a close-protection officer (who escorts the client)  or part of an ancillary unit that provides support such as ied detection  electronic  bug  detection  counter-sniper monitoring  pre-searching facilities  and background-checking people who will have contact with the client. second  the role of a bodyguard depends on the level of risk that the client faces. a bodyguard protecting a client at high risk of assassination will be focusing on very different roles (e.g.  checking cars for ied devices  bombs  watching for potential shooters  etc.) than a bodyguard escorting a celebrity who
is being stalked by aggressive tabloid photographers (e.g.  the role will be to ask the photographers to maintain their distance and block the path of aggressive cameramen). some bodyguards specialize in the close quarter protection of children of vips  to protect them from kidnapping or assassination.   === driving === in some cases  bodyguards also drive their clients. normally  it is not sufficient for a client to be protected by a single driver-bodyguard  because this would mean that the bodyguard would have to leave the car unattended when they escort the client on foot. if the car is left unattended  this can lead to several risks  an explosive device may be attached to the car  an electronic  bug  may be attached to the car  the car may be sabotaged  the car may be stolen  or city parking officials may simply tow away the vehicle or place a wheel clamp on the tire. if parking services tow away or disable the car  then the bodyguard cannot use the car to escape with the client in case there is a security threat while the client is at their meeting. the driver should be trained in evasive driving techniques  such as executing short-radius turns to change the direction of the vehicle  high-speed cornering  and so on. the car used by the client will typically be a large sedan with a low center of gravity and a powerful engine  such as a jaguar  bmw or mercedes benz. in some countries  large suvs such as chevrolet suburban are used for vips. at a minimum  the vehicle should have ballistic glass in the windows  some type of armor reinforcement to protect the client from gunfire  and a foam-filled gas tank.  run-flat tires  (which have either extremely stiff sidewalls or a resilient filler to allow driving a limited distance while flat  usually at reduced speed  without permanent damage or hazard) and armor protection for the driver are also desirable. the car may also be equipped with an additional battery  dual foot-pedal controls  such as those used by driving instruction companies (in case the driver is wounded or incapacitated)  a pa system with a microphone and a megaphone mounted on the outside of the car  so that the driver can give commands to other convoy vehicles or bodyguards who are on foot  fire extinguishers inside the vehicle in case the vehicle is struck by an incendiary weapon (such as a molotov cocktail)  a reinforced front and rear bumper  to enable the driver to ram attacking vehicles  and additional mirrors  to give the driver a better field of view. in latin american countries  many armored cars will come with a siren and lights to use in situations were they need to get out of places quickly. decoy convoys and vehicles are used to prevent tailing. in the event the convoy holding the client
is compromised and ambushed  decoy convoys can also act as a reinforcement force that can counter-attack a force that is attacking the primary convoy. some clients rotate between residences in different cities when attending public events or meetings to prevent being tailed home or to a private location.   === weapons and weapon tactics ===  depending on the laws in a bodyguard s jurisdiction and on which type of agency or security service they are in  bodyguards may be unarmed  armed with a less-lethal weapon such as a pepper spray  an expandable baton  or a taser (or a similar type stun gun)  or with a lethal weapon such as a handgun  or  in the case of a government bodyguard for a secret service-type agency  a machine pistol. some bodyguards such as those protecting high ranking government officials or those operating in high risk environments such as war zones may carry assault rifles.  in addition to these weapons  a bodyguard team may also have more specialist weapons to aid them in maintaining the safety of their principal  such as sniper rifles and anti-materiel rifles (for anti-sniper protection) or shotguns. osama bin laden s personal security detail consisted of  bodyguards...personally selected by him.  their  arsenal included sam-7 and stinger missiles  ak-47s  rpgs  and pk machine guns. bodyguards that protect high-risk principals may wear body armor such as kevlar or ceramic vests. the bodyguards may also have other ballistic shields  such as kevlar-reinforced briefcases or clipboards which  while appearing innocuous  can be used to protect the principal. the principal may also wear body armor in high-risk situations.   ==== counter-sniper weapons and tactics ====  for a close protection officer  the primary tactic against sniper attacks is defensive  avoid exposing the principal to the risk of being fired upon. this means that the principal should ideally be within an armored vehicle or a secure structure. as well  when the principal moves between a vehicle and a building  the principal must be moved quickly to minimize the time window in which a sniper could take a shot and use a flanking escort of close protection officers to block the view of the sniper and any potential shot that the sniper may take. the use of offensive tactics against snipers will occur very rarely in a bodyguard context  because it is very difficult for bodyguards to attempt to locate and fire back at a distant  concealed  or camouflaged sniper  even if the security detail has a carbine rifle or scoped sniper rifle in the trunk of the car.   == daily tasks == a bodyguard team protecting a high-profile politician who is at risk of attack would be based around escorting the client from a secure residence (e.g.  an embassy) to the different meetings and other activities they have to attend during the day (whether professional or social)  and then to escort
the client back to their residence.   === planning and assigning responsibilities === the day would begin with a meeting of the bodyguard team led by the team leader. the team would review the different activities that the client plans to do during the day  and discuss how the team would undertake the different transportation  escorting  and monitoring tasks. during the day  the client (or  principal ) may have to travel by car  train  and plane and attend a variety of functions  including meetings and invitations for meals at restaurants  and do personal activities such as recreation and errands.  over the day  the client will be exposed to a range of risk levels  ranging from higher risk (meeting and greeting members of the public at an outdoor rally) to low risk (dining at an exclusive  gated country club with high security).  some planning for the day would have begun on previous days. once the itinerary is known  one or more bodyguards would travel the route to the venues  to check the roads for unexpected changes (road work  detours  closed lanes) and to check the venue. the venue needs to be checked for bugs and the security of the facility (exits  entrances) needs to be inspected. as well  the bodyguards will want to know the names of the staff who will have contact with the client  so that a simple electronic background check can be run on these individuals. bodyguards often have training in firearms tactics  unarmed combat  tactical driving  and first aid. in multi-agent units (like those protecting a head of state) one or more bodyguards may have training in specific tasks  such as providing a protective escort  crowd screening and control  or searching for explosives or electronic surveillance devices ( bugs ). bodyguards also learn how to work with other security personnel to conduct threat or risk assessment and analyze potential security weaknesses.  bodyguards learn how to examine a premises or venue before their clients arrive  to determine where the exits and entrances are  find potential security weaknesses  and meet the staff (so that a would-be attacker cannot pose as a staff member). as well  some bodyguards learn how to do research to be aware of potential threats to their client  by doing a thorough assessment of the threats facing the principal  such as a protest by a radical group or the release from custody of person who is a known threat. close protection officers also learn how to escort a client in potentially threatening situations such as crowds that become unruly. the militaries in many countries offer close protection training for the members of their own armed forces who have been selected to work as bodyguards to officers or heads of state (e.g.  the 22 special air service regiment). as well  there are a number of private bodyguard training programs  which offer
training in all aspects of close protection and including the legal aspects of bodyguarding (e.g.  use of force  use of deadly force)  how to escort clients  driving  searching facilities and vehicles  and so on.   === searching vehicles ===  an hour prior to leaving with the client to their first appointment  the driver-bodyguard and another bodyguard remove the cars that will be used to transport the client from the locked garage and inspect them. there may be only one car for a lower risk client. a higher risk client will have additional cars to form a protective convoy of vehicles that can flank the client s vehicle. the vehicles are inspected before leaving.   === transferring client to vehicle === once the cars have been inspected and they are deemed to be ready for use  they are brought into position near the exit door where the client will leave the secure building. at least one driver-bodyguard stays with the cars while waiting  because the now-searched cars cannot be left unattended. if the convoy is left unattended  an attacker could attach an ied or sabotage one or more of the cars. then the bodyguard team flanks the client as they move from the secure residence to the car.   === travelling === the convoy then moves out towards the destination. the team will have chosen a route or two and in some cases it may involve three routes that are designated for travel along  which avoids the most dangerous  choke points  such as one-lane bridges or tunnels  because these routes have no way of escape and they are more vulnerable to ambush. a swat magazine article states that when the author was serving as security detail   where we used the beretta 92s we would try to grab at least one 93r 20-round mag to carry as a spare for breaking ambushes.  in some cases  if the client has to travel by train  the bodyguards will inspect the rail car they are traveling in and the other cars they will use. traveling on foot to a destination is very dangerous because of the lack of cover and control over the environment.   === arrival at destination ===  when the convoy arrives at the location  one or more bodyguards will exit first to confirm that the location is secure and that the staff who were booked to work that day are the ones who are present. if the location is secure  these bodyguards signal that it is safe to bring in the client. the client is escorted into the building using a flanking procedure. if the client is attending a private meeting inside the building  and the building itself is secure (controlled entrances) the client will not need to have a bodyguard escort in the building. the bodyguards can then pull back to monitor the principal s safety from a further distance. bodyguards could monitor entrances and
exits and the driver-bodyguard watches the cars. if the client is moving about in a fairly controlled environment such as a private golf course  which has limited entrances and exits  the security detail may drop down to one or two bodyguards  with the other bodyguards monitoring the entrances to the facility  the cars  and remaining in contact with the bodyguards escorting the client. throughout the day  as the client goes about their activities  the number of bodyguards escorting the client will increase or decrease according to the level of risk.   === return to secure location === after the day s activities  the client will be brought back to the secure residence location. exiting from the vehicle and walking to the door exposes the client to risk  so the distance is kept as short as possible to cut down the time it takes to reach the door. once the client is inside  the bodyguards assigned to the overnight detail will take up their positions outside or inside the residence. the vehicles are then parked in a locked garage (to prevent tampering  sabotage  or ied placement). some team members may spend additional time doing maintenance on the equipment used by the team. the tl (team leader) will ensure that all equipment is checked and packed away for the next day and ensure the radios are being charged for the next day s operation.   == job requirements ==  bodyguards often work long shifts in order to provide 24-hour protection  and shifts often include evenings  weekends  and holidays. since bodyguards follow their clients throughout their daily activities  the work locations may range from indoor office meetings or social events to outdoor rallies or concerts. bodyguards often have to travel by car  motorcycle  train  and airplane to escort their client. in some cases  international travel is required  which means that a bodyguard must have appropriate travel documentation. bodyguards often have backgrounds in the armed forces  police or security services  although this is not required. the exception to this is in the case of bodyguards protecting heads of state  in some countries  these bodyguards must be trained in military bodyguard training programs. military experience in foot patrol and convoy escort through urban areas in conflict or war as in afghanistan  iraq  west bank  northern ireland  beirut and basque country is considered highly dangerous  and difficult to match with any reasonable training time. bodyguards must be physically fit  with good eyesight and hearing  and they need to have a presentable appearance  especially for close protection work for dignitaries and heads of state. a driver s license is usually required  so that the bodyguard can double as a driver. in the united kingdom and some other countries  bodyguards have to have a license or certification with the sia  which involves identity and criminal record checks. to be a bodyguard
in an agency protecting a head of state  a bodyguard will have to undergo extensive background and loyalty checks.  bodyguards need to be observant  and retain their focus on their job  despite distractions such as fatigue. as well  they need to be able to work as member of a team  with assigned tasks  or be able to act independently  and adapt and improvise an appropriate response if the need arises. bodyguards need to be able to recognize potentially dangerous situations and remain calm under pressure. a bodyguard has to have a strong dedication to their protective role. since bodyguards often have to collaborate or coordinate their protection with other security forces  such as local police and other private security guards  bodyguards need good interpersonal and communications skills. since bodyguards accompany their client throughout their day  the bodyguard will be privy to the private life of the client  which means that a bodyguard has to show discretion and maintain confidentiality.   === close protection training ===  bodyguards often have training in firearms tactics  unarmed combat  tactical driving  and first aid. in multi-agent units (like those protecting a head of state) one or more bodyguards may have training in specific tasks  such as providing a protective escort  crowd screening and control  or searching for explosives or electronic surveillance devices ( bugs ). bodyguards also learn how to work with other security personnel to conduct threat or risk assessment and analyze potential security weaknesses. bodyguards learn how to examine a premises or venue before their clients arrive  to determine where the exits and entrances are  find potential security weaknesses  and meet the staff (so that a would-be attacker cannot pose as a staff member). as well  some bodyguards learn how to do research to be aware of potential threats to their client  by doing a thorough assessment of the threats facing the principal  such as a protest by a radical group or the release from custody of person who is a known threat. close protection officers also learn how to escort a client in potentially threatening situations. the military in many countries offer close protection training for the members of their own armed forces who have been selected to work as bodyguards to officers or heads of state (e.g. the british rmp - royal military police  close protection unit). in the private sector  there are a vast number of private bodyguard training companies  whom offer training in all aspects of close protection - relative to their local laws and threat level  including the legal aspects of physical protection (e.g.  use of force  use of deadly force)  how to escort clients  driving drills  searching facilities and vehicles  etc. in the uk  the industry is highly regulated by the security industry authority and requires an individual to obtain a level 3 vocational close protection qualification  pass an enhanced criminal
record background check  in addition to attending a recognised first-aid course prior to a license being issued. most uk security firms will request operatives hold an sia licence  even if operations are conducted outside of the uk. the sia model has been adopted and modified by nearby countries ireland and france. in france bodyguards require a cnaps (conséil national des activitées privée de sécurité) licence to operate legally as a bodyguard. both the sia and cnaps have came under heavy criticism over the years for failing to assist licence holders and meet their primary objectives of  raising the standards  in the private security industry.   == notable organizations ==  in countries where the head of state is a military leader or dictator  the leader s bodyguards may also be part of an elite military unit. such was the case with the somatophylakes in macedon  schutzstaffel in nazi germany  the former iraqi special republican guard  or the praetorian guard in the roman empire and its later iteration as the varangian guard in the byzantine period  or the housecarls of the english monarchs. the british monarch has at least three traditional bodyguard corps in service  known collectively as the sovereign s bodyguard. in india  vips are protected by national security guards (nsg)  an organization under the ministry of home affairs. the protection of the prime minister and some other important persons is entrusted with the special protection group (spg). spg was formed as a specialized unit in the protection of prime minister and his family members  after the assassination of the then prime minister indira gandhi  in 1984. former prime ministers also get the protection of spg for a period of 5 years  after stepping down from the post. the president of india is also protected by spg while the president s bodyguards  which is a mechanized regiment of indian army  has now a largely ceremonial role. persons with lower threat level are given security cover by delhi police in the capitol and respective state police forces elsewhere. in pakistan  the president and prime minister receive close protection teams from the military s elite special service group unit. president pervez musharraf  as civilian head of state  was due to have this withdrawn after retiring as chief of army staff  but the pakistan army has retained his close protection unit. in turkey  there are two main services  tasked with close protection. the prime minister of turkey is protected by the karşı saldırı timi nde (kst)  an elite counterattack team  a subunit of the office for protection of the prime minister (başbakanlık koruma dairesi başkanlığı). the office for protection of the pm is itself a service of the general directorate of security (emniyet genel müdürlüğü)  the civil police force of turkey. the president is closely protected by the cumhurbaskanligi muhafiz alayi  the 2 500-strong presidential guard regiment of the turkish army  subordinated to the 4th army
corps. it consists of specially selected personnel and is charged with the duty of protecting the president (and members of his family)  security of the presidential palaces and also the manning of the turkish president s mode of transport (e.g.  pilots for tc-ana  the presidential plane etc.).  in the united states  the united states secret service safeguards the lives of the president  his family  and other executive officials  including former presidents and vice-presidents. another agency  the state department s bureau of diplomatic security  is responsible for protecting u.s. missions and their personnel overseas  as well as selected dignitaries in the u.s.  including the ambassador to the united nations  the secretary of state  and visiting foreign dignitaries other than heads of state. while the secret service s close-protection role is its most visible  its historic role as agents of the united states treasury (although they are now agents of the department of homeland security) made it unusual internationally  as usually  official  bodyguards are part of general police forces. in the u.s. several private companies have been utilized for corporate executives and politicians.  in the uk during 1913-1914 the suffragette movement did protests in an attempt to change the uk law so that women would be able to vote. after suffragette leaders were threatened  activists formed an all-female close protection unit to protect the leaders of the women s social and political union both from harassment by the general public and from arrest under the so-called cat and mouse act. in the modern uk  royalty and diplomatic protection department of the metropolitan police is responsible for the security of the sovereign. in the vatican  the pope and other senior vatican officials are protected by the pontifical swiss guard  swiss mercenary soldiers who act as bodyguards  ceremonial guards  and palace guards. after the may 13  1981 assassination attempt on pope john paul ii by mehmet ali ağca  the guards were given enhanced training in unarmed combat and firearm use. the pope s chief bodyguard is the inspector general of the corps of gendarmerie of vatican city. in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries  most bodyguards are former or current police officers  or sometimes former military or other government agency personnel.   == in fiction ==   === novels and stories === the brave and fiercely protective bodyguard who is willing to die to protect his master has long been depicted in fiction. the character of the scottish hero quentin durward appears in stories as the bodyguard of the king of france. the character charles d artagnan appears in stories as the bodyguard of the french crown. the character atticus kodiak is a professional bodyguard who acts as narrator and protagonist in a series of novels by greg rucka. bodyguards also appear in usagi yojimbo  stan sakai s anthropomorphic-rabbit samurai based upon miyamoto musashi and in the artemis fowl series of children s
books.   === films and television === bodyguards are also depicted in a number of films and television programs. in an episode of star trek  tos entitled “mirror  mirror”  captain kirk and his landing party are exchanged with their counterparts from a savage parallel universe.  aboard the imperial enterprise  junior officers conspire to assassinate senior officers as a means of advancing in rank.  therefore  the imperial kirk is shadowed by a number of (presumably very well paid) security officers loyal only to him.  he refers to these men as his “personal guard”. japanese director akira kurosawa s film yojimbo depicts a samurai bodyguard in japan. the bodyguard (1992) is a film about a bodyguard who protects a celebrity singer. gogo yubari is o-ren ishii s bodyguard in the film kill bill  volume 1. in the science-fiction/fantasy star wars films  magnaguards are general grievous  bodyguards. being a body guard is also a duty performed on special occasions by the jedi knights. in the film lord of war  the main character s brother protects him while he makes arms deals in war-torn countries. in the motion picture my bodyguard (1980)  high school student clifford peache (chris makepeace) is bullied by melvin moody (matt dillon).  clifford asks school outcast ricky linderman (adam baldwin) to be his bodyguard. in the action comedy film shanghai noon  martial arts star jackie chan plays the role of an imperial guard of china on a mission to america to help rescue a princess. in the film man on fire (2004)  john creasy (denzel washington) is a burnt-out ex-cia officer and counter-insurgency operative who grudgingly becomes the bodyguard of a young girl (played by dakota fanning). when kidnappers attempt to snatch the girl  creasy is severely wounded in a gun battle. the film depicts his perseverance in attempting to continue to protect the girl despite his gunshot wounds  until he becomes unconscious. when he recovers  he goes on a revenge rampage in mexico city. the character sam  in the netflix film close  is another bodyguard who perseveres in protecting her client after being injured in the line of duty.  several films have been made about the secret service s role in guarding the president of the united states  such as in the line of fire and the sentinel.  bodyguards are also depicted in television shows  comics  and other media. bodyguard is a japanese television series starring reiko takashima. in the uk  bodyguards was a late 1990s british television series about a specialized close protection group that protected members of the uk government. more recently  bodyguard follows the story of a war veteran suffering from ptsd who becomes a specialist protection officer in the metropolitan police service  and assigned to protect an ambitious cabinet minister. on the e  television series the royals (2015–present)  hrh prince liam henstridge (william moseley) is protected by marcus jeffrys (ukweli roach)  his no-nonsense bodyguard
and confidante.  moreover  liam’s sister  hrh princess eleanor henstridge (alexandra park) is protected by bodyguard jasper frost (tom austen) – who is also blackmailing her for sex and having an affair with hrh queen helena henstridge (elizabeth hurley) on the side.   === video games === in the mortal kombat fighting game series  sheeva is the personal protector of sindel. suki is a japanese manga about a relationship between a teenage girl and a 32-year-old bodyguard. in the 2009 videogame grand theft auto  the ballad of gay tony  the main character luis fernando lopez works as a bodyguard for the nightclub owner anthony  gay tony  prince. in the 2012 video game dishonored  the player takes the role of corvo attano  a bodyguard of empress jessamine kaldwin  and gets framed for her murder. in the 2011 video game witcher 2  assassins of kings  the player takes the role of geralt of rivia  a professional monster slayer who begins the story as a reluctant bodyguard of king foltest of temeria.   === comics and graphic novels === the human target is an american comic book and television series about a bodyguard who also works as a private detective who impersonates his principal to draw his would be murderer s attention. the 2015 graphic novel trilogy suffrajitsu  mrs. pankhurst s amazons features a team of suffragette bodyguards inspired by the real-life close-protection team who protected the leaders of the radical women s suffrage movement from arrest and assault.   == see also == list of notable bodyguards list of protective service agencies private investigator private military company united states secret service secret service security detail security police—persons who guard government property.   === particular kinds === antrustion  the bodyguards of the merovingian kings praetorian guard  the bodyguards of the roman emperors rynda  ceremonial bodyguard of early russian tsars somatophylakes  the macedonian bodyguard of alexander the great spatharios  the inner circle bodyguard of eastern roman (byzantine) emperors yojimbo  the japanese word for bodyguard   == references ==
a scientist is someone who conducts scientific research to advance knowledge in an area of interest.in classical antiquity  there was no real ancient analog of a modern scientist. instead  philosophers engaged in the philosophical study of nature called natural philosophy  a precursor of natural science. it was not until the 19th century that the term scientist came into regular use after it was coined by the theologian  philosopher  and historian of science william whewell in 1833  to describe the noted polymath mary somerville.in modern times  many scientists have advanced degrees in an area of science and pursue careers in various sectors of the economy such as academia  industry  government  and nonprofit environments.   == history ==  the roles of  scientists  and their predecessors before the emergence of modern scientific disciplines  have evolved considerably over time.  scientists of different eras (and before them  natural philosophers  mathematicians  natural historians  natural theologians  engineers  and others who contributed to the development of science) have had widely different places in society  and the social norms  ethical values  and epistemic virtues associated with scientists—and expected of them—have changed over time as well. accordingly  many different historical figures can be identified as early scientists  depending on which characteristics of modern science are taken to be essential. some historians point to the scientific revolution that began in 16th century as the period when science in a recognizably modern form developed. it wasn t until the 19th century that sufficient socioeconomic changes occurred for scientists to emerge as a major profession.   === classical antiquity === knowledge about nature in classical antiquity was pursued by many kinds of scholars. greek contributions to science—including works of geometry and mathematical astronomy  early accounts of biological processes and catalogs of plants and animals  and theories of knowledge and learning—were produced by philosophers and physicians  as well as practitioners of various trades.  these roles  and their associations with scientific knowledge  spread with the roman empire and  with the spread of christianity  became closely linked to religious institutions in most of european countries. astrology and astronomy became an important area of knowledge  and the role of astronomer/astrologer developed with the support of political and religious patronage.  by the time of the medieval university system  knowledge was divided into the trivium—philosophy  including natural philosophy—and the quadrivium—mathematics  including astronomy.  hence  the medieval analogs of scientists were often either philosophers or mathematicians. knowledge of plants and animals was broadly the province of physicians.   === middle ages === science in medieval islam generated some new modes of developing natural knowledge  although still within the bounds of existing social roles such as philosopher and mathematician. many proto-scientists from the islamic golden age are considered polymaths  in part because of the lack of anything corresponding to modern scientific disciplines. many of these early polymaths were
also religious priests and theologians  for example  alhazen and al-biruni were mutakallimiin  the physician avicenna was a hafiz  the physician ibn al-nafis was a hafiz  muhaddith and ulema  the botanist otto brunfels was a theologian and historian of protestantism  the astronomer and physician nicolaus copernicus was a priest. during the italian renaissance scientists like leonardo da vinci  michelangelo  galileo galilei and gerolamo cardano have been considered as the most recognizable polymaths.   === renaissance === during the renaissance  italians made substantial contributions in science. leonardo da vinci made significant discoveries in paleontology and anatomy. the father of modern science galileo galilei  made key improvements on the thermometer and telescope which allowed him to observe and clearly describe the solar system. descartes was not only a pioneer of analytic geometry but formulated a theory of mechanics and advanced ideas about the origins of animal movement and perception. vision interested the physicists young and helmholtz  who also studied optics  hearing and music. newton extended descartes  mathematics by inventing calculus (contemporaneously with leibniz). he provided a comprehensive formulation of classical mechanics and investigated light and optics. fourier founded a new branch of mathematics — infinite  periodic series — studied heat flow and infrared radiation  and discovered the greenhouse effect. girolamo cardano  blaise pascal pierre de fermat  von neumann  turing  khinchin  markov and wiener  all mathematicians  made major contributions to science and probability theory  including the ideas behind computers  and some of the foundations of statistical mechanics and quantum mechanics. many mathematically inclined scientists  including galileo  were also musicians. there are many compelling stories in medicine and biology  such as the development of ideas about the circulation of blood from galen to harvey.   === age of enlightenment === during the age of enlightenment  luigi galvani  the pioneer of the bioelectromagnetics  discovered the animal electricity. he discovered that a charge applied to the spinal cord of a frog could generate muscular spasms throughout its body. charges could make frog legs jump even if the legs were no longer attached to a frog. while cutting a frog leg  galvani s steel scalpel touched a brass hook that was holding the leg in place. the leg twitched. further experiments confirmed this effect  and galvani was convinced that he was seeing the effects of what he called animal electricity  the life force within the muscles of the frog. at the university of pavia  galvani s colleague alessandro volta was able to reproduce the results  but was sceptical of galvani s explanation.lazzaro spallanzani is one of the most influential figures in experimental physiology and the natural sciences. his investigations have exerted a lasting influence on the medical sciences. he made important contributions to the experimental study of bodily functions and animal reproduction.francesco redi discovered that microorganisms can cause disease.    === 19th century === until the late 19th or early
20th century  scientists were still referred to as  natural philosophers  or  men of science .english philosopher and historian of science william whewell coined the term scientist in 1833  and it first appeared in print in whewell s anonymous 1834 review of mary somerville s on the connexion of the physical sciences published in the quarterly review. whewell s suggestion of the term was partly satirical  a response to changing conceptions of science itself in which natural knowledge was increasingly seen as distinct from other forms of knowledge.  whewell wrote of  an increasing proclivity of separation and dismemberment  in the sciences  while highly specific terms proliferated—chemist  mathematician  naturalist—the broad term  philosopher  was no longer satisfactory to group together those who pursued science  without the caveats of  natural  or  experimental  philosopher.  members of the british association for the advancement of science had been complaining about the lack of a good term at recent meetings  whewell reported in his review  alluding to himself  he noted that  some ingenious gentleman proposed that  by analogy with artist  they might form [the word] scientist  and added that there could be no scruple in making free with this term since we already have such words as economist  and atheist—but this was not generally palatable .whewell proposed the word again more seriously (and not anonymously) in his 1840  the philosophy of the inductive sciences   as we cannot use physician for a cultivator of physics  i have called him a physicist. we need very much a name to describe a cultivator of science in general. i should incline to call him a scientist. thus we might say  that as an artist is a musician  painter  or poet  a scientist is a mathematician  physicist  or naturalist.  he also proposed the term physicist at the same time  as a counterpart to the french word physicien.  neither term gained wide acceptance until decades later  scientist became a common term in the late 19th century in the united states and around the turn of the 20th century in great britain. by the twentieth century  the modern notion of science as a special brand of information about the world  practiced by a distinct group and pursued through a unique method  was essentially in place.   === 20th century === ramón y cajal won the nobel prize in 1906 for his remarkable observations in neuroanatomy. marie curie became the first female to win the nobel prize and the first person to win it twice. her efforts led to the development of nuclear energy and radiotherapy for the treatment of cancer. in 1922  she was appointed a member of the international commission on intellectual co-operation by the council of the league of nations. she campaigned for scientist s right to patent their discoveries and inventions. she also campaigned for free access
to international scientific literature and for internationally recognized scientific symbols.   == profession == as a profession  the scientist of today is widely recognized.    === education === in modern times  many professional scientists are trained in an academic setting (e.g.  universities and research institutes)  mostly at the level of graduate schools. upon completion  they would normally attain an academic degree  with the highest degree being a doctorate such as a doctor of philosophy (phd)  doctor of medicine (md)  doctor of engineering (deng)  or even a dual doctoral degree (e.g.  md  phd). although graduate education for scientists varies among institutions and countries  some common training requirements include specializing in an  area of interest  publishing research findings in peer-reviewed scientific journals and presenting them at scientific conferences  giving lectures or teaching  and defending a thesis (or dissertation) during an oral examination. to aid them in this endeavor  graduate students often work under the guidance of a mentor  usually a senior scientist  which may continue after the completion of their doctorates whereby they work as postdoctoral researchers.   === career === after the completion of their training  many scientists pursue careers in a variety of work settings and conditions. in 2017  the british scientific journal nature published the results of a large-scale survey of more than 5 700 doctoral students worldwide  asking them which sectors of the economy that would like to work in. a little over half of the respondents wanted to pursue a career in academia  with smaller proportions hoping to work in industry  government  and nonprofit environments.scientists are motivated to work in several ways. many have a desire to understand why the world is as we see it and how it came to be. they exhibit a strong curiosity about reality. other motivations are recognition by their peers and prestige. the nobel prize  a widely regarded prestigious award  is awarded annually to those who have achieved scientific advances in the fields of medicine  physics  chemistry  and economics.   some scientists have a desire to apply scientific knowledge for the benefit of people s health  the nations  the world  nature  or industries (academic scientist and industrial scientist). scientists tend to be less motivated by direct financial reward for their work than other careers. as a result  scientific researchers often accept lower average salaries when compared with many other professions which require a similar amount of training and qualification.although there have been exceptions  most scientists tend to do their best research when they are relatively young  in their 30s.   ==== research interests ==== scientists include experimentalists who mainly perform experiments to test hypotheses  and theoreticians who mainly develop models to explain existing data and predict new results. there is a continuum between two activities and the division between them is not clear-cut  with many scientists performing both
tasks. those considering science as a career often look to the frontiers. these include cosmology and biology  especially molecular biology and the human genome project. other areas of active research include the exploration of matter at the scale of elementary particles as described by high-energy physics  and materials science  which seeks to discover and design new materials. although there have been remarkable discoveries with regard to brain function and neurotransmitters  the nature of the mind and human thought still remains unknown.   === by specialization ===   ==== natural science ====   ===== physical science =====   ===== life science =====   ==== social science ====   ==== formal science ====   ==== applied ====   ==== interdisciplinary ====   === by employer === academic independent scientist industrial/applied scientist laypeople scientists/citizen scientist government scientist   == demography ==   === by country === the number of scientists is vastly different from country to country. for instance  there are only four full-time scientists per 10 000 workers in india while this number is 79 for the united kingdom and the united states.   ==== united states ==== according to the united states national science foundation 4.7 million people with science degrees worked in the united states in 2015  across all disciplines and employment sectors. the figure included twice as many men as women. of that total  17% worked in academia  that is  at universities and undergraduate institutions  and men held 53% of those positions. 5% of scientists worked for the federal government and about 3.5% were self-employed. of the latter two groups  two-thirds were men. 59% of us scientists were employed in industry or business  and another 6% worked in non-profit positions.   === by gender ===  scientist and engineering statistics are usually intertwined  but they indicate that women enter the field far less than men  though this gap is narrowing. the number of science and engineering doctorates awarded to women rose from a mere 7 percent in 1970 to 34 percent in 1985 and in engineering alone the numbers of bachelor s degrees awarded to women rose from only 385 in 1975 to more than 11000 in 1985.   == see also == engineers inventor researcher fields medal hippocratic oath for scientists history of science intellectual mad scientist natural science nobel prize protoscience normative science pseudoscience scholar science social sciencerelated listslist of engineers list of mathematicians list of nobel laureates in physics list of nobel laureates in chemistry list of nobel laureates in physiology or medicine list of russian scientists list of roman catholic cleric-scientists   == references ==   == external articles == further readingalison gopnik   finding our inner scientist  daedalus  winter 2004. charles george herbermann  the catholic encyclopedia. science and the church. the encyclopedia press  1913. v.13. page 598. thomas kuhn  the structure of scientific revolutions  1962. arthur jack meadows. the
victorian scientist  the growth of a profession  2004. isbn 0-7123-0894-6. science  the relation of pure science to industrial research. american association for the advancement of science. page 511 onwards.websitesfor best results  add a little inspiration - the telegraph about what inspired you  a survey of key thinkers in science  technology and medicine peer review journal science on amateur scientists the philosophy of the inductive sciences  founded upon their history (1847) - complete textaudio-visual the scientist  bbc radio 4 discussion with john gribbin  patricia fara and hugh pennington (in our time  oct. 24  2002)
an astronomer is a scientist in the field of astronomy who focuses their studies on a specific question or field outside the scope of earth. they observe astronomical objects such as stars  planets  moons  comets  and galaxies – in either observational (by analyzing the data) or theoretical astronomy. examples of topics or fields astronomers study include planetary science  solar astronomy  the origin or evolution of stars  or the formation of galaxies. related but distinct subjects like physical cosmology  which studies the universe as a whole. astronomers usually fall under either of two main types  observational and theoretical. observational astronomers make direct observations of celestial objects and analyze the data. in contrast  theoretical astronomers create and investigate models of things that cannot be observed. because it takes millions to billions of years for a system of stars or a galaxy to complete a life cycle  astronomers must observe snapshots of different systems at unique points in their evolution to determine how they form  evolve  and die. they use these data to create models or simulations to theorize how different celestial objects work. further subcategories under these two main branches of astronomy include planetary astronomy  galactic astronomy  or physical cosmology.   == academic ==  historically  astronomy was more concerned with the classification and description of phenomena in the sky  while astrophysics attempted to explain these phenomena and the differences between them using physical laws. today  that distinction has mostly disappeared and the terms  astronomer  and  astrophysicist  are interchangeable. professional astronomers are highly educated individuals who typically have a phd in physics or astronomy and are employed by research institutions or universities. they spend the majority of their time working on research  although they quite often have other duties such as teaching  building instruments  or aiding in the operation of an observatory. the number of professional astronomers in the united states is actually quite small. the american astronomical society  which is the major organization of professional astronomers in north america  has approximately 7 000 members. this number includes scientists from other fields such as physics  geology  and engineering  whose research interests are closely related to astronomy. the international astronomical union comprises almost 10 145 members from 70 different countries who are involved in astronomical research at the phd level and beyond.  contrary to the classical image of an old astronomer peering through a telescope through the dark hours of the night  it is far more common to use a charge-coupled device (ccd) camera to record a long  deep exposure  allowing a more sensitive image to be created because the light is added over time. before ccds  photographic plates were a common method of observation. modern astronomers spend relatively little time at telescopes usually just a few weeks per year. analysis of observed phenomena  along with making predictions as to the causes of what they observe  takes
the majority of observational astronomers  time. astronomers who serve as faculty spend much of their time teaching undergraduate and graduate classes. most universities also have outreach programs including public telescope time and sometimes planetariums as a public service to encourage interest in the field. those who become astronomers usually have a broad background in maths  sciences and computing in high school. taking courses that teach how to research  write and present papers are also invaluable. in college/university most astronomers get a phd in astronomy or physics.   == amateur astronomers ==  while there is a relatively low number of professional astronomers  the field is popular among amateurs. most cities have amateur astronomy clubs that meet on a regular basis and often host star parties. the astronomical society of the pacific is the largest general astronomical society in the world  comprising both professional and amateur astronomers as well as educators from 70 different nations. like any hobby  most people who think of themselves as amateur astronomers may devote a few hours a month to stargazing and reading the latest developments in research. however  amateurs span the range from so-called  armchair astronomers  to the very ambitious  who own science-grade telescopes and instruments with which they are able to make their own discoveries and assist professional astronomers in research.   == see also == list of astronomers list of women astronomers list of muslim astronomers list of french astronomers list of hungarian astronomers list of russian astronomers and astrophysicists list of slovenian astronomers   == references ==   === specific ===   === general === dallal  ahmad (1999).  science  medicine and technology .  in esposito  john (ed.). the oxford history of islam. oxford university press  new york. isbn 0-300-15911-0. kennedy  e.s. (1956).  a survey of islamic astronomical tables  transactions of the american philosophical society . 46 (2). philadelphia  american philosophical society.  toomer  gerald (1990).  al-khwārizmī  abu jaʿfar muḥammad ibn mūsā .  in gillispie  charles coulston (ed.). dictionary of scientific biography. 7. new york  charles scribner s sons. isbn 0-684-16962-2.   == external links == american astronomical society european astronomical society international astronomical union astronomical society of the pacific space s astronomy news
a chemist (from greek chēm (ía) alchemy  replacing chemist from medieval latin alchimista) is a scientist trained in the study of chemistry. chemists study the composition of matter and its properties. chemists carefully describe the properties they study in terms of quantities  with detail on the level of molecules and their component atoms. chemists carefully measure substance proportions  reaction rates  and other chemical properties. the word  chemist  is also used to address pharmacists in commonwealth english. chemists use this knowledge to learn the composition and properties of unfamiliar substances  as well as to reproduce and synthesize large quantities of useful naturally occurring substances and create new artificial substances and useful processes. chemists may specialize in any number of subdisciplines of chemistry. materials scientists and metallurgists share much of the same education and skills with chemists. the work of chemists is often related to the work of chemical engineers  who are primarily concerned with the proper design  construction and evaluation of the most cost-effective large-scale chemical plants and work closely with industrial chemists on the development of new processes and methods for the commercial-scale manufacture of chemicals and related products.   == history of chemistry ==  the roots of chemistry can be traced to the phenomenon of burning. fire was a mystical force that transformed one substance into another and thus was of primary interest to mankind. it was fire that led to the discovery of iron and glasses. after gold was discovered and became a precious metal  many people were interested to find a method that could convert other substances into gold. this led to the protoscience called alchemy. the word chemist is derived from the new latin noun chimista  an abbreviation of alchimista (alchemist). alchemists discovered many chemical processes that led to the development of modern chemistry. chemistry as we know it today  was invented by antoine lavoisier with his law of conservation of mass in 1783. the discoveries of the chemical elements has a long history culminating in the creation of the periodic table by dmitri mendeleev. the nobel prize in chemistry created in 1901 gives an excellent overview of chemical discovery since the start of the 20th century.   == education == jobs for chemists usually require at least a bachelor s degree  but many positions  especially those in research  require a  master of science or a doctor of philosophy (phd.). most undergraduate programs emphasize mathematics and physics as well as chemistry  partly because chemistry is also known as  the central science  thus chemists ought to have a well-rounded knowledge about science. at the master s level and higher  students tend to specialize in a particular field. fields of specialization include biochemistry  nuclear chemistry  organic chemistry  inorganic chemistry  polymer chemistry  analytical chemistry  physical chemistry  theoretical chemistry  quantum chemistry  environmental chemistry  and thermochemistry. postdoctoral experience may be required for certain positions. workers whose work involves chemistry 
but not at a complexity requiring an education with a chemistry degree  are commonly referred to as chemical technicians. such technicians commonly do such work as simpler  routine analyses for quality control or in clinical laboratories  having an associate degree. a chemical technologist has more education or experience than a chemical technician but less than a chemist  often having a bachelor s degree in a different field of science with also an associate degree in chemistry (or many credits related to chemistry) or having the same education as a chemical technician but more experience. there are also degrees specific to become a chemical technologist  which are somewhat distinct from those required when a student is interested in becoming a professional chemist. a chemical technologist is more involved in the management and operation of the equipment and instrumentation necessary to perform chemical analyzes than a chemical technician. they are part of the team of a chemical laboratory in which the quality of the raw material  intermediate products and finished products is analyzed. they also perform functions in the areas of environmental quality control and the operational phase of a chemical plant. in addition to all the training usually given to chemical technologists in their respective degree (or one given via an associate degree)  a chemist is also trained to understand more details related to chemical phenomena so that the chemist can be capable of more planning on the steps to achieve a distinct goal via a chemistry-related endeavor. the higher the competency level achieved in the field of chemistry (as assessed via a combination of education  experience and personal achievements)  the higher the responsibility given to that chemist and the more complicated the task might be. chemistry  as a field  have so many applications that different tasks and objectives can be given to workers or scientists with these different levels of education or experience. the specific title of each job varies from position to position  depending on factors such as the kind of industry  the routine level of the task  the current needs of a particular enterprise  the size of the enterprise or hiring firm  the philosophy and management principles of the hiring firm  the visibility of the competency and individual achievements of the one seeking employment  economic factors such as recession or economic depression  among other factors  so this makes it difficult to categorize the exact roles of these chemistry-related workers as standard for that given level of education. because of these factors affecting exact job titles with distinct responsibilities  some chemists might begin doing technician tasks while other chemists might begin doing more complicated tasks than those of a technician  such as tasks that also involve formal applied research  management  or supervision included within the responsibilities of that same job title. the level of supervision given to that chemist also varies in a similar manner  with factors similar to those that affect the tasks demanded for
a particular chemist.  it is important that those interested in a chemistry degree understand the variety of roles available to them (on average)  which vary depending on education and job experience. those chemists who hold a bachelor s degree are most commonly involved in positions related to either research assistance (working under the guidance of senior chemists in a research-oriented activity)  or  alternatively  they may work on distinct (chemistry-related) aspects of a business  organization or enterprise including aspects that involve quality control  quality assurance  manufacturing  production  formulation  inspection  method validation  visitation for troubleshooting of chemistry-related instruments  regulatory affairs   on-demand  technical services  chemical analysis for non-research purposes (e.g.  as a legal request  for testing purposes  or for government or non-profit agencies)  chemists may also work in environmental evaluation and assessment. other jobs or roles may include sales and marketing of chemical products and chemistry-related instruments or technical writing. the more experience obtained  the more independence and leadership or management roles these chemists may perform in those organizations. some chemists with relatively higher experience might change jobs or job position to become a manager of a chemistry-related enterprise  a supervisor  an entrepreneur or a chemistry consultant. other chemists choose to combine their education and experience as a chemist with a distinct credential to provide different services (e.g.  forensic chemists  chemistry-related software development  patent law specialists  environmental law firm staff  scientific news reporting staff  engineering design staff  etc.). in comparison  chemists who have obtained a master of science (m.s.) in chemistry or in a very related discipline may find chemist roles that allow them to enjoy more independence  leadership and responsibility earlier in their careers with less years of experience than those with a bachelor s degree as highest degree. sometimes  m.s. chemists receive more complex tasks duties in comparison with the roles and positions found by chemists with a bachelor s degree as their highest academic degree and with the same or close-to-same years of job experience. there are positions that are open only to those that at least have a degree related to chemistry at the master s level. although good chemists without a ph. d. degree but with relatively many years of experience may be allowed some applied research positions  the general rule is that ph. d. chemists are preferred for research positions and are typically the preferred choice for the highest administrative positions on big enterprises involved in chemistry-related duties. some positions  especially research oriented  will only allow those chemists who are ph. d. holders. jobs that involve intensive research and actively seek to lead the discovery of completely new chemical compounds under specifically assigned monetary funds and resources or jobs that seek to develop new scientific theories require a ph. d. more often than not. chemists with a ph. d. as the highest academic degree are found typically on the research-and-development department
of an enterprise and can also hold university positions as professors. professors for research universities or for big universities usually have a ph. d.  and some research-oriented institutions might require post-doctoral training. some smaller colleges (including some smaller four-year colleges or smaller non-research universities for undergraduates) as well as community colleges usually hire chemists with a m.s. as professors too (and rarely  some big universities who need part-time or temporary instructors  or temporary staff)  but when the positions are scarce and the applicants are many  they might prefer ph. d. holders instead.   == employment == the three major employers of chemists are academic institutions  industry  especially the chemical industry and the pharmaceutical industry  and government laboratories. chemistry typically is divided into several major sub-disciplines. there are also several main cross-disciplinary and more specialized fields of chemistry. there is a great deal of overlap between different branches of chemistry  as well as with other scientific fields such as biology  medicine  physics  radiology  and several engineering disciplines.  analytical chemistry is the analysis of material samples to gain an understanding of their chemical composition and structure. analytical chemistry incorporates standardized experimental methods in chemistry. these methods may be used in all subdisciplines of chemistry  excluding purely theoretical chemistry. biochemistry is the study of the chemicals  chemical reactions and chemical interactions that take place in living organisms. biochemistry and organic chemistry are closely related  for example  in medicinal chemistry.  inorganic chemistry is the study of the properties and reactions of inorganic compounds. the distinction between organic and inorganic disciplines is not absolute and there is much overlap  most importantly in the sub-discipline of organometallic chemistry. the inorganic chemistry is also the study of atomic and molecular structure and bonding. medicinal chemistry is the science involved with designing  synthesizing and developing pharmaceutical drugs. medicinal chemistry involves the identification  synthesis and development of new chemical entities suitable for therapeutic use. it also includes the study of existing drugs  their biological properties  and their quantitative structure-activity relationships. organic chemistry is the study of the structure  properties  composition  mechanisms  and chemical reaction of carbon compounds. physical chemistry is the study of the physical fundamental basis of chemical systems and processes. in particular  the energetics and dynamics of such systems and processes are of interest to physical chemists. important areas of study include chemical thermodynamics  chemical kinetics  electrochemistry  quantum chemistry  statistical mechanics  and spectroscopy. physical chemistry has a large overlap with theoretical chemistry and molecular physics. physical chemistry involves the use of calculus in deriving equations. theoretical chemistry is the study of chemistry via theoretical reasoning (usually within mathematics or physics). in particular  the application of quantum mechanics to chemistry is called quantum chemistry. since the end of the second world war  the development of computers has allowed a systematic development of computational chemistry  which is the art of developing and applying
computer programs for solving chemical problems. theoretical chemistry has large overlap with condensed matter physics and molecular physics. see reductionism.all the above major areas of chemistry employ chemists. other fields where chemical degrees are useful include astrochemistry (and cosmochemistry)  atmospheric chemistry  chemical engineering  chemo-informatics  electrochemistry  environmental science  forensic science  geochemistry  green chemistry  history of chemistry  materials science  medical science  molecular biology  molecular genetics  nanotechnology  nuclear chemistry  oenology  organometallic chemistry  petrochemistry  pharmacology  photochemistry  phytochemistry  polymer chemistry  supramolecular chemistry and surface chemistry.   == professional societies == chemists may belong to professional societies specifically for professionals and researchers within the field of chemistry  such as the  royal society of chemistry in the united kingdom  or the american chemical society (acs) in the united states.   == honors and awards == the highest honor awarded to chemists is the nobel prize in chemistry  awarded since 1901  by the royal swedish academy of sciences.   == see also == pharmacist list of chemistry topics list of chemists list of russian chemists list of important publications in chemistry list of scientific journals in chemistry list of compounds list of chemistry societies   == references ==   == external links == american chemical society website chemical abstracts service indexes and abstracts the world s chemistry-related literature and patents chemists and materials scientists from the u.s. department of labor s occupational outlook handbook royal society of chemistry website history of chemistry links for chemists luminaries of the chemical sciences accomplishments  biography  and publications from 44 of the most influential chemists selected classic papers from the history of chemistry links for chemists guide to web sites related to chemistry chemistryviews.org website
a physicist is a scientist who specializes in the field of physics  which encompasses the interactions of matter and energy at all length and time scales in the physical universe. physicists generally are interested in the root or ultimate causes of phenomena  and usually frame their understanding in mathematical terms. physicists work across a wide range of research fields  spanning all length scales  from sub-atomic and particle physics  through biological physics  to cosmological length scales encompassing the universe as a whole. the field generally includes two types of physicists  experimental physicists who specialize in the observation of physical phenomena and the analysis of experiments  and theoretical physicists who specialize in mathematical modeling of physical systems to rationalize  explain and predict natural phenomena. physicists can apply their knowledge towards solving practical problems or to developing new technologies (also known as applied physics or engineering physics).   == history ==  the study and practice of physics is based on an intellectual ladder of discoveries and insights from ancient times to the present. many mathematical and physical ideas used today found their earliest expression in the work of ancient civilizations  such as the babylonian astronomers and egyptian engineers  the phoenician scholar thales of miletus  euclid in ptolemaic egypt  and the greek writers archimedes and aristarchus. roots also emerged in ancient asian cultures such as india and china  and particularly the islamic medieval period  which saw the development of scientific methodology emphasising experimentation  such as the work of ibn al-haytham (alhazen) in the 11th century  for example. the modern scientific worldview and the bulk of physics education can be said to flow from the scientific revolution in europe  starting with the work of galileo galilei and johannes kepler in the early 1600s. newton s laws of motion and newton s law of universal gravitation were formulated in the 17th century.  the experimental discoveries of faraday and the theory of maxwell s equations of electromagnetism were developmental high points during the 19th century. many physicists contributed to the development of quantum mechanics in the early-to-mid 20th century. new knowledge in the early 21st century includes a large increase in understanding physical cosmology. the broad and general study of nature  natural philosophy  was divided into several fields in the 19th century  when the concept of  science  received its modern shape. specific categories emerged  such as  biology  and  biologist   physics  and  physicist   chemistry  and  chemist  among other technical fields and titles. the term physicist was coined by william whewell (also the originator of the term  scientist ) in his 1840 book the philosophy of the inductive sciences.   == education == a standard undergraduate physics curriculum consists of classical mechanics  electricity and magnetism  non-relativistic quantum mechanics  optics  statistical mechanics and thermodynamics  and laboratory experience. physics students also need training in mathematics (calculus 
differential equations  linear algebra  complex analysis  etc.)  and in computer science. any physics-oriented career position requires at least an undergraduate degree in physics or applied physics  while career options widen with a master s degree like msc  mphil  mphys or msci.for research-oriented careers  students work toward a doctoral degree specializing in a particular field. fields of specialization include experimental and theoretical astrophysics  atomic physics   biological physics  chemical physics   condensed matter physics  cosmology  geophysics  gravitational physics  material science  medical physics  microelectronics  molecular physics  nuclear physics  optics  radiophysics  electromagnetic field and microwave physics  particle physics  and plasma physics.   == honors and awards == the highest honor awarded to physicists is the nobel prize in physics  awarded since 1901 by the royal swedish academy of sciences. national physics professional societies have many prizes and awards for professional recognition. in the case of the american physical society  as of 2017  there are 33 separate prizes and 38 separate awards in the field.   == careers == the three major employers of career physicists are academic institutions  laboratories  and private industries  with the largest employer being the last. physicists in academia or government labs tend to have titles such as assistants  professors  sr./jr. scientist  or postdocs. as per the american institute of physics  some 20% of new physics ph.d.s holds jobs in engineering development programs  while 14% turn to computer software and about 11% are in business/education. a majority of physicists employed apply their skills and training to interdisciplinary sectors (e.g. finance). job titles for graduate physicists include agricultural scientist  air traffic controller  biophysicist  computer programmer  electrical engineer  environmental analyst  geophysicist  medical physicist  meteorologist  oceanographer  physics teacher/professor/researcher  research scientist  reactor physicist  engineering physicist  satellite missions analyst  science writer  stratigrapher  software engineer  systems engineer  microelectronics engineer  radar developer  technical consultant  etc.a majority of physics terminal bachelor s degree holders are employed in the private sector. other fields are academia  government and military service  nonprofit entities  labs and teaching.typical duties of physicists with master s and doctoral degrees working in their domain involve research  observation and analysis  data preparation  instrumentation  design and development of industrial or medical equipment  computing and software development  etc.   == professional certification ==   === united kingdom === chartered physicist (cphys) is a chartered status and a professional qualification awarded by the institute of physics. it is denoted by the postnominals  cphys . achieving chartered status in any profession denotes to the wider community a high level of specialised subject knowledge and professional competence. according to the institute of physics  holders of the award of the chartered physicist (cphys) demonstrate the  highest standards of professionalism  up-to-date
expertise  quality and safety  along with  the capacity to undertake independent practice and exercise leadership  as well as  commitment to keep pace with advancing knowledge and with the increasing expectations and requirements for which any profession must take responsibility . chartered physicist is considered to be equal in status to chartered engineer  which the iop also awards as a member of the engineering council uk  and other chartered statuses in the uk. it is also considered a  regulated profession  under the european professional qualification directives.   === canada === the canadian association of physicists can appoint an official designation called the p. phys. which stands for professional physicist  similar to the designation of p. eng. which stands for professional engineer. this designation was unveiled at the cap congress in 1999 and already more than 200 people carry this distinction. to get the certification  at minimum proof of honours bachelor or higher degree in physics or a closely related discipline must be provided. also  the physicist must have completed  or be about to complete  three years of recent physics-related work experience after graduation. and  unless exempted  a professional practice examination must also be passed. exemption can be granted to candidate that have practiced physics for at least seven years and provide a detailed description of their professional accomplishments which clearly demonstrate that the exam is not necessary.  work experience will be considered physics-related if it uses physics directly or significantly utilizes the modes of thought (such as the approach to problem-solving) developed in your education and/or experience as a physicist  in all cases regardless of whether the experience is in academia  industry  government  or elsewhere. management of physics related work qualifies  and so does appropriate graduate student work.   === south africa === the south african institute of physics delivers a certification of professional physicists (pr.phys). at a minimum  the owner must possess a 3-year bachelors or equivalent degree in physics or a related field and an additional minimum of six years  experience in a physics-related activity  or an honor or equivalent degree in physics or a related field and an additional minimum of five years  experience in a physics-related activity  or master or equivalent degree in physics or a related field and an additional minimum of three years  experience in a physics-related activity  a doctorate or equivalent degree in physics or a related field  or training or experience which  in the opinion of the council  is equivalent to any of the above.   == see also ==   == references ==   == further reading ==   == external links == how to become a good theoretical physicist  utrecht university physicists and astronomers  us bureau of labor statistics  occupational outlook handbook  physicists and astronomers physicist careers careers through engineering physics
a geographer is a scientist whose area of study is geography  the study of earth s natural environment and human society. the greek prefix   geo  means  earth  and the greek suffix   graphy  meaning  description  so a geographer is someone who studies the earth. the word  geography  is a middle french word that is believed to have been first used in 1540.although geographers are historically known as people who make maps  map making is actually the field of study of cartography  a subset of geography. geographers do not study only the details of the natural environment or human society  but they also study the reciprocal relationship between these two. for example  they study how the natural environment contributes to human society and how human society affects the natural environment. in particular  physical geographers study the natural environment while human geographers study human society. modern geographers are the primary practitioners of the gis (geographic information system)  who are often employed by local  state  and federal government agencies as well as in the private sector by environmental and engineering firms. the paintings by johannes vermeer titled the geographer and the astronomer are both thought to represent the growing influence and rise in prominence of scientific enquiry in europe at the time of their painting in 1668–69.   == areas of study == there are three major fields of study  which are further subdivided   physical geography  including geomorphology  hydrology  glaciology  biogeography  climatology  meteorology  pedology  oceanography  geodesy  and environmental geography. human geography  including urban geography  cultural geography  economic geography  political geography  historical geography  marketing geography  health geography  and social geography. regional geography  including atmosphere  biosphere  and lithospherethe national geographic society identifies five broad key themes for geographers   location place human-environment interaction movement regions   == see also ==   == references ==   == further reading == steven seegel.  map men  transnational lives and deaths of geographers in the making of east central europe. university of chicago press  2018. isbn 978-0-226-43849-8.   == external links ==  media related to geographers at wikimedia commons
a geologist is a scientist who studies the solid  liquid  and gaseous matter that constitutes the earth and other terrestrial planets  as well as the processes that shape them. geologists usually study geology  although backgrounds in physics  chemistry  biology  and other sciences are also useful. field work is an important component of geology  although many subdisciplines incorporate laboratory work. geologists work in the energy and mining sectors searching for natural resources such as petroleum  natural gas  precious and base metals. they are also in the forefront of preventing and mitigating damage from natural hazards and disasters such as earthquakes  volcanoes  tsunamis and landslides. their studies are used to warn the general public of the occurrence of these events. geologists are also important contributors to climate change discussions.   == history ==  james hutton is often viewed as the first modern geologist. in 1785 he presented a paper entitled theory of the earth to the royal society of edinburgh. in his paper  he explained his theory that the earth must be much older than had previously been supposed to allow enough time for mountains to be eroded and for sediments to form new rocks at the bottom of the sea  which in turn were raised up to become dry land. hutton published a two-volume version of his ideas in 1795 (vol. 1  vol. 2). followers of hutton were known as plutonists because they believed that some rocks were formed by vulcanism  which is the deposition of lava from volcanoes  as opposed to the neptunists  led by abraham werner  who believed that all rocks had settled out of a large ocean whose level gradually dropped over time.  the first geological map of the united states was produced in 1809 by william maclure. in 1807  maclure commenced the self-imposed task of making a geological survey of the united states. almost every state in the union was traversed and mapped by him  the allegheny mountains being crossed and recrossed some 50 times. the results of his unaided labors were submitted to the american philosophical society in a memoir entitled observations on the geology of the united states explanatory of a geological map  and published in the society s transactions  together with the nation s first geological map. this antedates william smith s geological map of england by six years  although it was constructed using a different classification of rocks. sir charles lyell first published his famous book  principles of geology  in 1830. this book  which influenced the thought of charles darwin  successfully promoted the doctrine of uniformitarianism. this theory states that slow geological processes have occurred throughout the earth s history and are still occurring today. in contrast  catastrophism is the theory that earth s features formed in single  catastrophic events and remained unchanged thereafter. though hutton believed in uniformitarianism  the idea was not widely accepted at the time.   ==
training / schooling ==  for an aspiring geologist  training typically includes significant coursework in physics  mathematics  and chemistry  in addition to classes offered through the geology department  historical and physical geology  igneous and metamorphic petrology and petrography  hydrogeology  sedimentology  stratigraphy  mineralogy  palaeontology  physical geography and structural geology are among the many required areas of study.  most geologists also need skills in gis and other mapping techniques.  geology students often spend portions of the year  especially the summer though sometimes during a january term  living and working under field conditions with faculty members (often referred to as  field camp ). many non-geologists often take geology courses or have expertise in geology that they find valuable to their fields  this is common in the fields of geography  engineering  chemistry  urban planning  environmental studies  among others.   === areas of specialization ===  geologists may concentrate their studies or research in one or more of the following disciplines   economic geology  the study of ore genesis  and the mechanisms of ore creation  geostatistics. engineering geology  application of the geologic sciences to engineering practice for the purpose of assuring that the geologic factors affecting the location  design  construction  operation and maintenance of engineering works are recognized and adequately provided for  geophysics  the applied branch deals with the application of physical methods such as gravity  seismicity  electricity  magnetic properties to study the earth. geochemistry  the applied branch deals with the study of the chemical makeup and behaviour of rocks  and the study of the behaviour of their minerals. geochronology  the study of isotope geology specifically toward determining the date within the past of rock formation  metamorphism  mineralization and geological events (notably  meteorite impacts). geomorphology  the study of landforms and the processes that create them hydrogeology  the study of the origin  occurrence and movement of groundwater water in a subsurface geological system. igneous petrology  the study of igneous processes such as igneous differentiation  fractional crystallization  intrusive and volcanological phenomena. isotope geology  the case of the isotopic composition of rocks to determine the processes of rock and planetary formation. metamorphic petrology  the study of the effects of metamorphism on minerals and rocks. marine geology  the study of the seafloor  involves geophysical  geochemical  sedimentological and paleontological investigations of the ocean floor and coastal margins. marine geology has strong ties to physical oceanography and plate tectonics. palaeoclimatology  the application of geological science to determine the climatic conditions present in the earth s atmosphere within the earth s history. palaeontology  the classification and taxonomy of fossils within the geological record and the construction of a palaeontological history of the earth. pedology  the study of soil  soil formation  and regolith formation. petroleum geology  the study of sedimentary basins applied to the
search for hydrocarbons (oil exploration). planetary geology  the study of geology as it relates to other celestial bodies  namely planets and their moons. this includes the subdiscipline of lunar geology  selenology  and martian geology  areology. sedimentology  the study of sedimentary rocks  strata  formations  eustasy and the processes of modern-day sedimentary and erosive systems. seismology  the study of earthquakes. structural geology  the study of folds  faults  foliation and rock microstructure to determine the deformational history of rocks and regions. volcanology  the study of volcanoes  their eruptions  lavas  magma processes and hazards.   == employment ==  professional geologists work for a wide range of government agencies  private firms  and non-profit and academic institutions. they are usually hired on a contract basis or hold permanent positions within private firms or official agencies (such as the united states geologic survey). local  state  and national governments hire geologists to work on geological projects that are of interest to the public community. the investigation of a country s natural resources is often a key role when working for government institutions  the work of the geologist in this field can be made publicly available to help the community make more informed decisions related to the exploitation of resources  management of the environment and the safety of critical infrastructure - all of which is expected to bring greater wellbeing to the country. this  wellbeing  is often in the form of greater tax revenues from new or extended mining projects or through better infrastructure and/or natural disaster planning.  an engineering geologist is employed to investigate geologic hazards and geologic constraints for the planning  design and construction of public and private engineering projects  forensic and post-mortem studies  and environmental impact analysis. exploration geologists use all aspects of geology and geophysics to locate and study natural resources. in many countries or u.s. states without specialized environmental remediation licensure programs  the environmental remediation field is often dominated by professional geologists  particularly hydrogeologists  with professional concentrations in this aspect of the field. petroleum and mining companies use mudloggers  and large-scale land developers use the skills of geologists and engineering geologists to help them locate oil and minerals  adapt to local features such as karst topography or earthquake risk  and comply with environmental regulations. geologists in academia usually hold an advanced degree in a specialized area within their geological discipline and are employed by universities.   == professional designation ==  in canada  national instrument 43-101 requires reports containing estimates of mineral resources and reserves to be prepared by  or under the supervision of  a qualified person (qp) who has at least five years of experience with the reported minerals and is a member of a professional association.  the qp accepts personal liability for the professional quality of the report and underlying work.the rules and guidelines codified in national instrument 43-101 were introduced after
a scandal in 1997 where bre-x geologists salted drill core samples at a gold exploration property in busang  indonesia. the falsified drilling results misled bre-x investors and upon discovery of the fraud  the company collapsed in the largest gold mining scam in history.   == see also == list of geologists petroleum geologist   == references ==
a biologist is a scientist who has specialized knowledge in the field of biology  the scientific study of life. biologists involved in fundamental research attempt to explore and further explain the underlying mechanisms that govern the functioning of living matter. biologists involved in applied research attempt to develop or improve more specific processes and understanding  in fields such as medicine and industry. biologists are interested in understanding the underlying mechanisms that govern the functioning of living matter as well as the complex properties that emerge from the biophysical  biochemical  cellular and systemic interactions of living systems. biologists conduct research using the scientific method to test the validity of a theory in a rational  unbiased and reproducible manner. this consists of hypothesis formation  experimentation and data analysis to establish the validity or invalidity of a scientific theory. there are different types of biologists. theoretical biologists use mathematical methods and develop models to understand  phenomena and ideally predict future experimental results  while experimental biologists conceive experiments to test those predictions. some biologists work on microorganisms  while others study multicellular organisms (including humans). some investigate the nano or micro-scale  others emergent properties such as ecological interactions or cognition. there is much overlap between different fields of biology (e.g. zoology  microbiology  genetics and evolutionary biology) and due to the interdisciplinary nature of the field it is often difficult to classify a life scientist as only one of them. many biological scientists work in research and development. some conduct fundamental research to advance human knowledge of life. furthermore  applied biological research often aids the development of solutions to problems in areas such as human health and the natural environment. biological scientists mostly work in government  university  and private industry laboratories.   == research ==  biologists who work in basic research formulate theories and devise experiments to advance human knowledge on life including topics such as evolution  biochemistry  molecular biology  neuroscience and cell biology. biological scientists who work in applied research use instead the accomplishments gained by basic research to further knowledge in particular fields or applications. for example  this applied research may be used to develop new pharmaceutical drugs  treatments and medical diagnostic tests. biological scientists conducting applied research and product development in private industry may be required to describe their research plans or results to non-scientists who are in a position to veto or approve their ideas. these scientists must consider the business effects of their work. while theoretical biologists usually work in  dry  labs  formulating mathematical models and running computer simulations  some experimental biologists conduct laboratory experiments involving animals  plants  microorganisms or biomolecules. however  a small part of experimental biological research also occurs outside the laboratory and may involve natural observation rather than experimentation. for example  a botanist may investigate the plant species present in a particular environment  while an ecologist might study how a forest area recovers after a fire. swift advances in
knowledge of genetics and organic molecules spurred growth in the field of biotechnology  transforming the industries in which biological scientists work. biological scientists can now manipulate the genetic material of animals and plants  attempting to make organisms (including humans) more productive or resistant to disease. basic and applied research on biotechnological processes  such as recombining dna  has led to the production of important substances  including human insulin and growth hormone. many other substances not previously available in large quantities are now produced by biotechnological means. some of these substances are useful in treating diseases. those working on various genome (chromosomes with their associated genes) projects isolate genes and determine their function. this work continues to lead to the discovery of genes associated with specific diseases and inherited health risks  such as sickle cell anemia. advances in biotechnology have created research opportunities in almost all areas of biology  with commercial applications in areas such as medicine  agriculture  and environmental remediation.   == specialists == most biological scientists specialize in the study of a certain type of organism or in a specific activity  although recent advances have blurred some traditional classifications. geneticists study genetics  the science of genes  heredity  and variation of organisms. neuroscientists study the nervous system. developmental biologists study the process of development and growth of organisms biochemists study the chemical composition of living things. they analyze the complex chemical combinations and reactions involved in metabolism  reproduction  and growth. molecular biologists study the biological activity between biomolecules. microbiologists investigate the growth and characteristics of microscopic organisms such as bacteria  algae  or fungi. physiologists study life functions of plants and animals   in the whole organism and at the cellular or molecular level  under normal and abnormal conditions. physiologists often specialize in functions such as growth  reproduction  photosynthesis  respiration  or movement  or in the physiology of a certain area or system of the organism. biophysicists use experimental methods traditionally employed in physics to answer biological questions . computational biologists apply the techniques of computer science  applied mathematics and statistics to address biological problems. the main focus lies on developing mathematical modeling and computational simulation techniques. by these means it addresses scientific research topics with their theoretical and experimental questions without a laboratory. zoologists and wildlife biologists study animals and wildlife—their origin  behavior  diseases  and life processes. some experiment with live animals in controlled or natural surroundings  while others dissect dead animals to study their structure. zoologists and wildlife biologists also may collect and analyze biological data to determine the environmental effects of current and potential uses of land and water areas. zoologists usually are identified by the animal group they study. for example  ornithologists study birds  mammalogists study mammals  herpetologists study reptiles and amphibians  ichthyologists study fish  cnidariologists study jellyfishes and entomologists study insects. botanists study plants and their environments. some study all aspects of plant life 
including algae  lichens  mosses  ferns  conifers  and flowering plants  others specialize in areas such as identification and classification of plants  the structure and function of plant parts  the biochemistry of plant processes  the causes and cures of plant diseases  the interaction of plants with other organisms and the environment  the geological record of plants and their evolution.  mycologists study fungi  such as yeasts  mold and mushrooms  which are a separate kingdom from plants. aquatic biologists study micro-organisms  plants  and animals living in water. marine biologists study salt water organisms  and limnologists study fresh water organisms. much of the work of marine biology centers on molecular biology  the study of the biochemical processes that take place inside living cells. marine biology is a branch of oceanography  which is the study of the biological  chemical  geological  and physical characteristics of oceans and the ocean floor. (see the handbook statements on environmental scientists and hydrologists and on geoscientists.) ecologists investigate the relationships among organisms and between organisms and their environments  examining the effects of population size  pollutants  rainfall  temperature  and altitude. using knowledge of various scientific disciplines  ecologists may collect  study  and report data on the quality of air  food  soil  and water. evolutionary biologists investigate the evolutionary processes that produced the diversity of life on earth  starting from a single common ancestor. these processes include natural selection  common descent  and speciation.   == working conditions == biological scientists are not usually exposed to unsafe or unhealthy conditions. those who work with dangerous organisms or toxic substances in the laboratory must follow strict safety procedures to avoid contamination. many biological scientists  such as botanists  ecologists  and zoologists  conduct field studies that involve strenuous physical activity and primitive living conditions. biological scientists in the field may work in warm or cold climates  in all kinds of weather. marine biologists encounter a variety of working conditions. some work in laboratories  others work on research ships  and those who work underwater must practice safe diving while working around sharp coral reefs and hazardous marine life. although some marine biologists obtain their specimens from the sea  many still spend a good deal of their time in laboratories and offices  conducting tests  running experiments  recording results  and compiling data. many biological scientists depend on grant money to fund their research. they may be under pressure to meet deadlines and to conform to rigid grant-writing specifications when preparing proposals to seek new or extended funding. biological scientists typically work regular hours. while the 40-hour workweek is common  longer hours are not uncommon. researchers may be required to work odd hours in laboratories or other locations (especially while in the field)  depending on the nature of their research.   == honors and awards == the highest honor awarded to
biologists is the nobel prize in physiology or medicine  awarded since 1901  by the royal swedish academy of sciences. another significant award is the crafoord prize in biosciences  established in 1980.   == see also == biology glossary of biology list of biologists lists of biologists by author abbreviation   == references ==  u.s. department of labor  occupational outlook handbook
sales are activities related to selling or the number of goods or services sold in a given time period. the seller  or the provider of the goods or services  completes a sale in response to an acquisition  appropriation  requisition  or a direct interaction with the buyer at the point of sale. there is a passing of title (property or ownership) of the item  and the settlement of a price  in which agreement is reached on a price for which transfer of ownership of the item will occur. the seller  not the purchaser  typically executes the sale and it may be completed prior to the obligation of payment. in the case of indirect interaction  a person who sells goods or service on behalf of the owner is known as a salesman or saleswoman or salesperson  but this often refers to someone selling goods in a store/shop  in which case other terms are also common  including salesclerk  shop assistant  and retail clerk. in common law countries  sales are governed generally by the common law and commercial codes. in the united states  the laws governing sales of goods are somewhat uniform to the extent that most jurisdictions have adopted article 2 of the uniform commercial code  albeit with some non-uniform variations.   == definition == a person or organization expressing an interest in acquiring the offered item of value is referred to as a potential buyer  prospective customer  or prospect. buying and selling are understood to be two sides of the same  coin  or transaction. both seller and buyer engage in a process of negotiation to consummate the exchange of values. the exchange  or selling  process has implied rules and identifiable stages. it is implied that the selling process will proceed fairly and ethically so that the parties end up nearly equally rewarded. the stages of selling  and buying  involve getting acquainted  assessing each party s need for the other s item of value  and determining if the values to be exchanged are equivalent or nearly so  or  in buyer s terms   worth the price . sometimes  sellers have to use their own experiences when selling products with appropriate discounts.although the skills required are different  from a management viewpoint  sales is a part of marketing. sales often form a separate grouping in a corporate structure  employing separate specialist operatives known as salespersons (singular  salesperson). selling is considered by many to be a sort of persuading  art . contrary to popular belief  the methodological approach of selling refers to a systematic process of repetitive and measurable milestones  by which a salesman relates his or her offering of a product or service in return enabling the buyer to achieve their goal in an economic way.according to a 2018 survey of salespeople  selling has become more difficult in recent years due to changes in technology and
general access to prospects. while the sales process refers to a systematic process of repetitive and measurable milestones  the definition of the selling is somewhat ambiguous due to the close nature of advertising  promotion  public relations  and direct marketing. selling is the profession-wide term  much like marketing defines a profession. recently  attempts have been made to clearly understand who is in the sales profession  and who is not. there are many articles looking at marketing  advertising  promotions  and even public relations as ways to create a unique transaction. many believe that the focus of selling is on the human agents involved in the exchange between buyer and seller. effective selling also requires a systems approach  at minimum involving roles that sell  enable selling  and develop sales capabilities. selling also involves salespeople who possess a specific set of sales skills and the knowledge required to facilitate the exchange of value between buyers and sellers that is unique from marketing and advertising. within these three tenets  the following definition of professional selling is offered by the american society for training and development (astd)   team selling is one way to influence sales. team selling is  a group of people representing the sales department and other functional areas in the firm  such as finance  production  and research and development . (spiro) team selling came about in the 1990s through total quality management (tqm). tqm occurs when companies work to improve their customer satisfaction by constantly improving all their operations.   === relationships with marketing === marketing and sales differ greatly  but they generally have the same goal. selling is the final stage in marketing which puts the plan into effect. a marketing plan includes pricing  promotion  place  and product (the 4 p s). a marketing department in an organization has the goals of increasing the desirability and value of the products and services to the customer and increasing the number and engagement of successful interactions between potential customers and the organization. achieving this goal may involve the sales team using promotional techniques such as advertising  sales promotion  publicity  and public relations  creating new sales channels  or creating new products. it can also include encouraging the potential customer to visit the organization s website  contact the organization for more information  or interact with the organization via social media channels such as twitter  facebook and blogs. social values play a major role in consumer decision processes. marketing is the whole of the work on persuasion made for the whole of the target people. sales is the process of persuasion and effort from one person to one person (b2c)  or one person to a corporation (b2b)  in order to make a living resource enter the company. this may occur in person  over the phone or digitally. the field of sales process engineering views  sales  as the output of a larger system
 not just as the output of one department. the larger system includes many functional areas within an organization. from this perspective  the labels  sales  and  marketing  cover several processes whose inputs and outputs supply one another. in this context  improving an  output  (such as sales) involves studying and improving the broader sales process  since the component functional areas interact and are interdependent.many large corporations structure their marketing departments so they are integrated with all areas of the business. they create multiple teams with a singular focus  and the managers of these teams must coordinate efforts in order to drive profits and business success. for example  an  inbound  campaign seeks to drive more customers  through the door  giving the sales department a better chance of selling their product to the consumer. a good marketing program would address any potential downsides as well. the sales department would aim to improve the interaction between the customer and the sales channel or salesperson. as sales is the forefront of any organization  this would always need to take place before any other business process may begin. sales management involves breaking down the selling process and increasing the effectiveness of the discrete processes  as well as improving the interactions between processes. for example  in an outbound sales environment  the typical process includes outbound calling  the sales pitch  handling objections  opportunity identification  and the close. each step of the process has sales-related issues  skills  and training needs  as well as marketing solutions to improve each discrete step. one further common complication of marketing is the difficulty in measuring results for some marketing initiatives. some marketing and advertising executives focus on creativity and innovation without concern for the top or bottom lines – a fundamental pitfall of marketing for marketing s sake. many companies find it challenging to get their marketing and sales teams to agree. the two departments  although different in nature  handle very similar concepts and have to work together to achieve the business  goals. building a good relationship between the two teams that encourages communication can be the key to success.   === industrial marketing === the idea that marketing can potentially eliminate the need for salespeople depends entirely on context.  for example  this may be possible in some b2c situations  however  for many b2b transactions (for example  those involving industrial organizations) this is mostly impossible. another dimension is the value of the goods being sold. fast-moving consumer-goods (fmcg) require no sales people at the point of sale to get them to jump off the supermarket shelf and into the customer s trolley. however  the purchase of large mining equipment worth millions of dollars will require a salesperson to manage the sales process – particularly in the face of competitors. small and medium businesses selling such large ticket items to a geographically-disperse client base use manufacturers  representatives to provide
this highly personal service while avoiding the large expense of a captive sales force.   === sales and marketing alignment and integration === another area of discussion involves the need for alignment and integration of corporate sales and marketing functions. according to a report from the chief marketing officer (cmo) council  only 40 percent of companies have formal programs  systems or processes in place to align and integrate the two critical functions. traditionally  these two functions  as referenced above  have operated separately  left in siloed areas of tactical responsibility. glen petersen s book the profit maximization paradox sees the changes in the competitive landscape between the 1950s and the time of writing as so dramatic that the complexity of choice  price  and opportunities for the customer forced this seemingly simple and integrated relationship between sales and marketing to change forever. petersen goes on to highlight that salespeople spend approximately 40 percent of their time preparing customer-facing deliverables while leveraging less than 50 percent of the materials created by marketing  adding to perceptions that marketing is out of touch with the customer and that sales is resistant to messaging and strategy.   == methods ==  a sale can take place through  agency-based sales complex sales consignment consultative sales retail or consumer sales agents (for example in real estate or in manufacturing) sales outsourcing through direct branded representation telemarketing or telesales transaction sales business-to-business – business-to-business ( b2b ) sales are likely to be larger in terms of volume  economic value and complexity than business-to-consumer ( b2c ) sales. often the complexity involves one business working closely with the other to define problems  to finding solutions  to supporting after-sale operation. because of this complexity  there is a need to manage the relationships between the buying and selling organizations  for example using peter cheverton s relationship models and the stakeholder map by anderson  bryson and crosby channel sales  an indirect sales model  which differs from direct sales. channel selling is a way for sellers to reach the  b2b  and  b2c  markets through distributors  re-sellers or value added re-sellers vars. direct sales  involving person to person contact electronic electronic data interchange web – business-to-business ( b2b ) and business-to-consumer ( b2c ) indirect  human-mediated but with indirect contact mail-order vending machine pro forma sales request for proposal – an invitation for suppliers  through a bidding process  to submit a proposal on a specific product or service  an rfp usually represents part of a complex sales process  also known as  enterprise sales  selling technique  action selling auctions challenger sales cold calling conceptual selling consultative selling cross-selling guaranteed sale hard selling inbound sales needs-based selling paint-the-picture personal selling persuasive selling price based selling professional selling skills relationship selling reverse selling sales enablement sales habits sales negotiation sales outsourcing sandler selling system social selling solution selling strategic selling take-out or take away target account
selling transactional selling upselling traveling salesman door-to-door methods hawking   === sales agents === agents in the sales process can represent either of two parties in the sales process  for example   buyers broker or buyer brokerage  this is where the salesman represents the consumer making the purchase. this is most often applied in large transactions. disclosed dual agent  this is where the salesman represents both parties in the sale and acts as a mediator for the transaction. the role of the salesman here is to oversee that both parties receive an honest and fair deal. internet sales professionals  these people are primarily responsible for ensuring immediate response to the leads generated via social media  website or email campaigns. sales broker  seller agency  seller agent  seller representative  this is a traditional role where the salesman represents a person or company on the selling end of a deal. sales managers aim to implement various sales strategies and management techniques in order to facilitate improved profits and increased sales volume. they are also responsible for coordinating the sales and marketing department as well as oversight concerning the fair and honest execution of the sales process by their agents. sales outsourcing involves direct branded representation where the sales representatives are recruited  hired  and managed by an external entity but hold quotas  represent themselves as the brand of the client  and report all activities (through their own sales management channels) back to the client. it is akin to a virtual extension of a sales force (see sales outsourcing). salesperson  the primary function of professional salespeople is to generate and close business resulting in revenue. the salesperson will accomplish their primary function through a variety of means including phone calls  email  social media  networking  and cold calling.  the primary objective of the successful salesperson is to find the consumers to sell to.  sales are often referred to as a  numbers game  because a general law of averages and pattern of successful closing of business will emerge through heightened sales activity. these activities include but are not limited to  locating prospects  fostering relationships with prospects  building trust with future clients  identifying and filling needs of consumers  and therefore turning prospective customers into actual ones. many tools are used by successful salespeople  the most important of which is questioning which can be defined as a series of questions and resulting answers allowing the salesperson to understand a customer s goals and requirements relevant to the product they are selling. the creation of value or perceived value is the result of taking the information gathered  analyzing the goals and needs of the prospective customer and leveraging the products or services the salesperson s firm represents or sells in a way that most effectively achieves the prospective client s goals or suits their needs.  effective salespeople will package their offering and present their proposed solution in a way that
leads the prospective customer to the conclusion that they acquire the solution  resulting in revenue and profit for the salesperson and the organization they represent. transaction broker  this is where the salesperson represents neither party but handles the transaction only. the seller owes no responsibility to either party getting a fair or honest deal  just that all papers are handled properly.   === inside sales vs. outside sales === in the united states  the fair labor standards act defines outside sales representatives as  employees [who] sell their employer s products  services  or facilities to customers away from their employer s place(s) of business  in general  either at the customer s place of business or by selling door-to-door at the customer s home  while defining those who work  from the employer s location  as inside sales. inside sales generally involves attempting to close business primarily over the phone via telemarketing  while outside sales (or  field  sales) will usually involve initial phone work to book sales calls at the potential buyer s location to attempt to close the deal in person. some companies have an inside sales department that works with outside representatives and book their appointments for them. inside sales sometimes refers to upselling to existing customers.   == see also == buzzword choice architecture demand chain financial transaction personal selling sales (accounting) sales contest sales effectiveness sales incentive plan sales territory sales variance trade vendor   == references ==   == external links ==
a baker is a tradesperson who bakes and sometimes sells breads and other products made of flour by using an oven or other concentrated heat source. the place where a baker works is called a bakery.   == history ==   === ancient history === since grains have been a staple food for millennia  the activity of baking is a very old one. control of yeast  however  is relatively recent. by the fifth and sixth centuries bce  the ancient greeks used enclosed ovens heated by wood fires  communities usually baked bread in a large communal oven. greeks baked dozens and possibly hundreds of types of bread  athenaeus described seventy-two varieties.in ancient rome several centuries later  the first mass production of breads occurred  and  the baking profession can be said to have started at that time.  ancient roman bakers used honey and oil in their products  creating pastries rather than breads. in ancient rome  bakers (latin  pistor) were sometimes slaves  who were (like other slave-artisans) sometimes manumitted. large households in rome normally had their own bakers.the gauls are credited with discovering that the addition of beer froth to bread dough made well-leavened bread  marking the use of controlled yeast for bread dough.   === medieval europe === in medieval europe  baking ovens were often separated from other buildings (and sometimes located outside city walls) to mitigate the risk of fire. because bread was an important staple food  bakers  production factors (such as bolting yields  ingredients  and loaf sizes) were heavily regulated. for example  henry iii of england promulgated the assize of bread and ale in 1267  subjecting all commercial bakers and brewers to various fees in order to practice their trade and imposing various regulations  such as inspection and verification of weights and measures  quality control  and price controls. soon after the enactment of the assize   baking became a very stable industry  and was executed much more professionally than brewing  resulting in towns and villages having fewer bakers than brewers.  because ovens were expensive capital investments and required careful operation  specialized bakeries opened.bakers were often part of the guild system  which was well-established by the sixteenth century  master bakers instructed apprentices and were assisted by journeymen. in amsterdam in 1694  for example  the cake-bakers  pie-bakers  and rusk-bakers separated from an earlier bread bakers guild and formed their own guild  regulating the trade. a fraternity of bakers in london existed as early as 1155  according to records of payments to the exchequer  the worshipful company of bakers was formed by charters dated 1486  1569  and 1685. the guild still exists today  with mostly ceremonial and charitable functions. five bakers have served as lord mayor of london.   === ming dynasty china === in ming dynasty china  bakers were divided into different social statuses according to their
customers. bakers were among the thousands of servants who served in the ming palace  including recruited cooks  imperial eunuchs  and trained serving-women (shangshiju). bakers often joined the occupation through apprenticeship  or by being born into a family of bakers.in addition to the secular aspect of baking  ming bakers also were responsible for providing pastries for use in various rituals  festivals and ceremonies  such as zongzi. in  shi fu meets a friend at tanque  buns were provided for the construction ceremony.within bakeries  traditional patriarchal hierarchy controlled. for the family-owned bakery  the eldest male figure (usually the father) in the highest position of the hierarchy. for example  in feng menglong s story  when mr. bo went out looking for the family s lost silver  his wife was ordered to take care of the bakery.ming fiction and art records examples of various bakers  for example  in feng menglong s story  the bo couple owns a bakery to sell the cakes and snacks while in water margin  the character wu dalang does not have a settled store and sells pancakes on the shoulder pole along the street the ming-era painter qiu ying s work along the river during the qingming festival shows food stores alongside the street and peddlers who are selling food along the streets.the ming work ming dai tong su ri yong lei shu  which records techniques and items needed in ming daily life  devotes a full chapter to culinary skills  including the preparation of pancakes and other types of cakes.the work the plum in the golden vase mentions baozi (steam bun).   === columbian exchange === the columbian exchange  which began in 1492  had a profound influence on the baking occupation. access to sugar greatly increased as a result of new cultivation in the caribbean  and ingredients such as cocoa and chocolate became available in the old world. in the eighteenth century  processors learned how to refine sugar from sugar beets  allowing europeans to grow sugar locally.  these developments led to an increase in the sophistication of baking and pastries  and the development of new products such as puff pastries and danish dough.   === 18th century to present ===  two important books on bread-baking were published in the 1770s  paul-jacques malaouin  published l art du meinier  du boulanger et du vermicellier (the art of the miller  the bread-baker  and the pasta-maker) in 1775  and antoine-augustin parmentier published le parfair boulanger (the perfect bread-baker) in 1778.a study of the english city of manchester from 1824–85  during the industrial revolution  determined that  baker and shopkeeper  was the third-most common occupation  with 178 male bakers  19 female bakers  and eight bakers of unknown sex in the city at that time. this occupation was less common that cloth manufacturer and tavern/public house worker  but more common than cotton spinner  merchant
 calico printer  or grocer.in 1895  the new york state assembly passed a reformist  bakeshop law  which included protections for bakery workers  the law  banned employees from sleeping in the bakeries  specified the drainage  plumbing and maintenance necessary to keep the bakeries sanitary (cats were specifically allowed to stay on the premise—presumably to deal with the rats)  limited the daily and weekly maximum of hours worked  and established an inspectorate to make sure these conditions were met.  the legislation was soon replicated in other states. joseph lochner  a bakery owner in utica  new york  was subsequently convicted of violating the law for forcing his employees to work more than sixty hours a week. he appealed his case to the u.s. supreme court  which decided  in the highly influential case of lochner v. new york (1905)  over a dissent from justice oliver wendell holmes  that the labor law violated a constitutional right to  freedom of contract.  this case marked the beginning of a  pro-employer  laissez-faire  era  later known as the lochner era  which  would cast a long shadow over american law  society  and politics  until the late 1930s  when lochner was repudiated. frustrated with the rapid deterioration of working conditions  bakery workers in new york went on strike in august 1905.   == roman catholic patron saints == in roman catholic tradition  the patron saint of bakers and pastry chefs is honoratus of amiens (honoré)  a sixth-century bishop of amiens in northern france for whom the st. honoré cake is named.  lazarus of bethany (lazare) was originally a competitor to honoré for the title of patron saint of bakers  but in the 17th century the french bakers  guild settled in favor of honoré.   == as a surname ==  baker is an easily recognizable english surname of medieval occupational origin  baxster is the female form. equivalent family names of occupational origin meaning  baker  exist in other languages  boulanger  bulinger  dufour  and fournier in french  pfister and becker in german  and piekarz in polish.   == duties and occupational hazards == according to the occupational outlook handbook (ooh) published by the bureau of labor statistics of the united states department of labor   bakers typically do the following  check the quality of baking ingredients prepare equipment for baking measure and weigh flour and other ingredients combine measured ingredients in mixers or blenders knead  roll  cut  and shape dough place dough into pans  into molds  or onto baking sheets set oven temperatures place items into ovens or onto grills observe color and state of products being baked apply glazes  icings  or other toppingsbakers produce various types and quantities of breads  pastries  and other baked goods sold by grocers  wholesalers  restaurants  and institutional
food services. some bakers create new recipes.  bakers encounter a number of occupational hazards. ooh reports that bakeries   especially large manufacturing facilities  are filled with potential dangers such as hot ovens  mixing machines  and dough cutters. as a result  bakers have a higher rate of injuries and illnesses than the national average. although their work is generally safe  bakers may endure back strains caused by lifting or moving heavy bags of flour or other products. other common risks include cuts  scrapes  and burns. to reduce these risks  bakers often wear back supports  aprons  and gloves. baker s asthma—commonly caused by flour allergens and the microbial enzymes (often aspergillus-derived) used to facilitate breadmaking—is one of the common causes of occupational asthma worldwide.   === comparison with pastry chef === both bakers and pastry chefs make desserts and breads.  in some restaurants and shops  a single individual serves in both roles. in other environments  there is a distinction between the two positions  with bakers making breads  rolls  and muffins  and pastry chefs making desserts  such as cakes  pies  tarts  and cookies. even when both bakers and pastry chefs work in the same place  however  there may be overlap.   == equipment ==  a variety of equipment is used by bakers  including   baker s peel - a large  flat paddle  either wood or metal  used to slide loaves into and out of an oven rolling pin - a tool used to roll dough flour scoops - a tool used to add  remove  or measure flour brushes - a tool used to brush off excess flour from dough  and for glazing flour mills - a tool used to mill grains  may be either hand-cranked or mechanical   == employment statistics ==   === united states === according to the occupational outlook handbook published by the bureau of labor statistics of the united states department of labor  there were 185 300 bakers in the u.s. in 2014  with median pay of $23 600 per year or $11.35 per hour. about 28% of u.s. bakers work in stand-alone bakeries or in tortilla manufacturing  26% work in grocery stores  15% work in restaurants and other eating places  and 5% were self-employed. about 30% of u.s. bakers worked part-time in 2014.   == gallery ==          == see also ==   == references ==
a cook is a profession for individuals who prepare food for consumption in the food industry in settings such as restaurants. a cook is sometimes referred to as a chef  although in the culinary world  the terms are not interchangeable. cooks  responsibilities include preparing food  managing food stations  cleaning the kitchen  and helping the chefs. restaurants will give a title to the cooks according to their designated stations. examples are broiler cooks  fry cooks  pantry cooks  and sauce cooks.   == history == in 776 bc  coroebus of elis who won the ancient olympic games in a sprint race was also a cook.in the middle age of northern france (around 9th-15th century)  being a cook was a known profession in the community. in a sense  cooks were acknowledged as trained craftsmen. taillevent wrote in the le viandier- a classic recipe collection in medieval france- that he underwent different levels of training such as being an apprentice and journeyman before he acquired a master grade. the master or queu attained knowledge passed from one generation to another. georges auguste escoffier (1846-1935) described cook in the brigade de cuisine as the cuisinier.  they help the top levels in the hierarchy  such as chefs  and prepare specific dishes.   === ming china === during the ming dynasty (1368-1644)  the profession of cook was one that served  on the most part  the upper echelons of society  serving the likes of merchants  officials and landlords.  the development of the culinary world in china during the ming dynasty  due to the new ‘new world’ crops  such as maize  potatoes  and chilis  created an environment which led to a new and quality foods being accessible to more and more people in ming china.. the new variety in foods on offer to cooks even led to various instruction manuals and recipe books on food preparation  .    ==== cook employment ==== the cooks that prepared and cooked the food for those of the chinese population that were in the upper echelons of society and therefore could afford it  would operate through inns  restaurants and even by roaming the streets as a street vendor  thus offering customers a variety of options. . however  despite the growing variety of foods and food sellers in ming china  the services of most of the professional cooks was reserved for the elite class. . the court was an extremely large employer of cooks throughout the entirety of the ming dynasty  with over 9 000 cooks employed in the 15th century  the cooks in the employment of the court would be expected to provide for around 10 000 to 15 000 people on a daily basis  including providing them all with wine  . aside from just cooking food to be eaten  the court also employed around 1 800 cooks to prepare sacrifices and offerings for
rituals  around 200 000 animals were sacrificed yearly  including vast amounts of geese  pigs  and sheep . cooks would provide meals for merchants and landlords as well  but  they weren’t employed at the same high rate as the cooks employed by the court. the merchants and landlords who could afford the luxury of personally cooked food by a professional chef could usually expect a great quality and even extremely skill-heavy and laborious types of cooking  for example baking and sugar animals  . this exclusivity of cooks for the rich associated the profession and its work with the greed and gluttony of the elite classes  so  often private food preparation with cooks would be connected with evil or villainy. .    ==== status of cooks ==== the cooks in ming china  as mentioned before  was only available to be utilised by the very wealthy. despite the exclusive nature of the job and the status levels of those they prepared food for  the occupation of the cook during ming times was not a highly coveted profession due to the amount of animal killing involved with being a cook.  the negative karma associated with killing the sentient living beings  and then using this as a means of making a living  makes the profession of cook one that was described to be avoided. the nature of a cooks work and the religious values of taoism and buddhism clash heavily  reinforcing this idea of a cook being an undesirable occupation  furthermore  cooks were known to request the safe passage of their slaughtered animals to the pure land through amitabha. . despite the various negative aspects associated with the cook profession in ming china  there were still some positives for it  being a cook required a certain level of skill and to a certain extent it was artisanal  demanding fine tuning of skills and finesse  which in turn earnt the profession of cook and other similar professions respect amongst their peers.    ==== recipe books ==== cooks in ming china could learn their trade through the multitude of recipe books and herbal guides that was punished during the ming dynasty  . these books and guides were published as a way to promote individual health  and mostly dealt with the health benefits of foods and yangsheng(养生)  meaning ‘nourish life’ .  an example of one of these recipe books is titled the old glutton’s collection (laotao ji 老饕集)  written by zhang dai . zhang dai not only provided recipes for guidance  he also wrote about the connections between food and health as well as the relationship to class levels and food    == salary & economics value == based on the united states bureau of labor statistics  the number of work opportunities for cooks is expected to go up by 6 percent during the time period of 2016 to 2026.  in 2016 
the number of jobs for a cook was at 2 403 000. the rate is projected to increase slower than food preparation workers  bakers  and chefs (all of which are projected to increase by at least 8 percent from 2016 to 2026). in addition  cooks earn about $22 850 a year  which is about $10.99 an hour. as of october 2017  the average income for cooks was around c$33 400 a year.as of 2018 cooks in australia earn about au$20.48 for every hour of work.   == education ==   === united states === there is not a strict set of achievements that one must accomplish before one can become a cook.there are institutions that provide culinary programs  such as vocational cooking schools. there are mandatory lessons that cover topics such as food safety  sanitation  hospitality  and advanced cooking. this will last for less than two years to four years.it is also known that some cooks receive their education through culinary apprenticeships that can be sponsored by professional culinary institutes or trade unions. apprenticeships usually have a duration of one year and provide on-the-job experience along with technical training.based on the american culinary federation  the minimum requirements for entering such programs include being 17 years old and having a high school diploma or equivalent. should they seek out a promotion to higher level culinary professions  they may get a culinary certification that proves them to have at least two years of job experience and basic knowledge of kitchen skills.   === united kingdom === gcse in english and math could help individuals who are interested in becoming cooks. however  it is more valuable if they experienced apprenticeship or training in any culinary institution or courses. there are certain colleges from different areas that provide training and development programs. among these are wales  england  and northern ireland. examples of certificate or diploma available are diploma in introduction to professional cookery  certificate in general cookery  and diploma in food production and cooking.   == health concerns == there are various health concerns that arise from working in a kitchen. cooks who deal with uncooked meat have the chance to catch food-borne illnesses. additionally  cooks are at risk of breathing in and touching chemical products such as bleach and glass cleaner. two other potential concerns are the risk of getting injured from the use of sharp objects  or from touching hot surfaces. another possible health danger is that cooks could fall due to wet and slick floors.   == regional differences ==   === middle east === professional cooks in the middle east are predominantly men. because of religious restrictions (except for a small amount of christian-based groups)  cooks typically refrain from using pork to make meals while lamb and chicken are the standard meats used. then  the meat will be served with either bread or rice. according to jill eversole nolan  there is a high percentage of
middle easterners that are lactose intolerant which is why dairy is not frequently used when eating meals. cattle are frequently used for carrying or moving items and are to only be used for food when there is no other purpose for them. even then  beef is not easy to use as a food source and are served in chunks  either dried  raw  or cooked. on the other hand  eggplants are easy to buy off the streets and are highly used by middle eastern cooks with over 40 dishes prepared while just using the main ingredient.   === mexico === mexican cooks make a strong point to respect the dishes they make and that these dishes reflect their “heritage  and  soul.  the amount of passion they have directly tied into how well their food comes out and how flavorful it may be. cooks will often haggle and buy their ingredients from street markets while their corn tortillas are either handmade (which is considerably time-consuming) or bought from tortillerias. mexican cuisine has been influenced by french invaders and integrates both styles in their food. crêpes  or crepas  as they are called in mexico  were introduced to them by the french invaders and are widely used for various dishes.   == see also == chef chief cook cook (domestic worker) domestic worker cooking list of cooking techniques personal chef   == references ==
a chef is a trained professional cook and tradesman who is proficient in all aspects of food preparation  often focusing on a particular cuisine. the word  chef  is derived from the term chef de cuisine (french pronunciation  ​[ʃɛf.də.kɥi.zin])  the director or head of a kitchen. chefs can receive formal training from an institution  as well as by apprenticing with an experienced chef. there are different terms that use the word chef in their titles  and deal with specific areas of food preparation  such as the sous-chef  who acts as the second-in-command in a kitchen  or the chef de partie  who handles a specific area of production  or “television chef”  such as alison holst. the kitchen brigade system is a hierarchy found in restaurants and hotels employing extensive staff  many of which use the word  chef  in their titles. underneath the chefs are the kitchen assistants. a chef s standard uniform includes a hat (called a toque)  neckerchief  double-breasted jacket  apron and sturdy shoes (that may include steel or plastic toe-caps).   == etymology == the word  chef  is derived (and shortened) from the term chef de cuisine (french pronunciation  ​[ʃɛf.də.kɥi.zin])  the director or head of a kitchen. (the french word comes from latin caput (head) and is a doublet with english  chief ). in english  the title  chef  in the culinary profession originated in the haute cuisine of the 19th century. the culinary arts  among other aspects of the french language introduced french loan-words into the english language.   == titles ==  various titles  detailed below  are given to those working in a professional kitchen and each can be considered a title for a type of chef. many of the titles are based on the brigade de cuisine (or brigade system) documented by auguste escoffier  while others have a more general meaning depending on the individual kitchen.   === chef de cuisine ===  other names include executive chef  chef manager  head chef  and master chef. this person is in charge of all activities related to the kitchen  which usually includes menu creation  management of kitchen staff  ordering and purchasing of inventory  controlling raw material costs and plating design. chef de cuisine is the traditional french term from which the english word chef is derived. head chef is often used to designate someone with the same duties as an executive chef  but there is usually someone in charge of a head chef  possibly making the larger executive decisions such as direction of menu  final authority in staff management decisions  and so on. this is often the case for executive chefs with multiple restaurants. involved in checking the sensory evaluation of dishes after preparation and they are well aware of each sensory property of those specific dishes. in the uk  the title executive chef normally applies
to hotels with multi outlets in the same hotel. other establishments in the uk tend to use the title head chef.   === sous-chef ===  the sous-chef de cuisine (under-chef of the kitchen) is the second-in-command and direct assistant of the chef de cuisine. sous chef works under executive chef or head chef. this person may be responsible for scheduling the kitchen staff  or   substituting when the head chef is off-duty. also  he or she will fill in for or assist the chef de partie (line cook) when needed. this person is accountable for the kitchen s inventory  cleanliness  organization  and the continuing training of its entire staff. a sous-chef s duties can also include carrying out the head chef s directives  conducting line checks  and overseeing the timely rotation of all food products. smaller operations may not have a sous-chef  while larger operations may have more than one. the sous chef is also responsible when the executive chef is absent.   === chef de partie ===  a chef de partie  also known as a  station chef  or  line cook  is in charge of a particular area of production. in large kitchens  each chef de partie might have several cooks or assistants. in most kitchens  however  the chef de partie is the only worker in that department.  line cooks are often divided into a hierarchy of their own  starting with  first cook  then  second cook  and so on as needed.   === commis (chef) / range chef === a commis is a basic chef in larger kitchens who works under a chef de partie to learn the station s or range s responsibilities and operation. this may be a chef who has recently completed formal culinary training or is still undergoing training.   === brigade system titles === station-chef titles which are part of the brigade system include    == kitchen assistant == kitchen assistants are of two types  kitchen-hands and stewards/ kitchen porters. kitchen-hands assist with basic food preparation tasks under the chef s direction. they carry out relatively unskilled tasks such as peeling potatoes and washing salad. stewards/ kitchen porters are involved in the scullery  washing up and general cleaning duties. in a smaller kitchen  these duties may be incorporated. a communard is in charge of preparing the meal for the staff during a shift. this meal is often referred to as the staff or family meal.the escuelerie (from 15th century french and a cognate of the english  scullery )  or the more modern plongeur or dishwasher  is the keeper of dishes  having charge of dishes and keeping the kitchen clean. a common humorous title for this role in some modern kitchens is  chef de plonge  or  head dishwasher .   == culinary education ==  education is available from many culinary institutions offering diploma  associate
 and bachelor s degree programs in culinary arts. depending on the level of education  this can take one to four years. an internship is often part of the curriculum. regardless of the education received  most professional kitchens follow the apprenticeship system  and most new cooks will start at a lower-level 2nd or 1st cook position and work their way up.  like many skilled trades  chefs usually go through a formal apprenticeship which includes many years of on-the-job training. culinary schools and restaurants offer these apprenticeships. to become an apprentice  one must be at least 18 years old and have a high school diploma or ged. apprenticeships usually take 3 to 4 years to complete and combine classroom instruction with on-the-job training. the training period for a chef is generally four years as an apprentice. a newly qualified chef is advanced or more commonly a torquecommis-chef  consisting of first-year commis  second-year commis  and so on. the rate of pay is usually in accordance with the chefs. like all other chefs except the executive-chef  trainees are placed in sections of the kitchen (e.g.  the starter (appetizer) or entrée sections) under the guidance of a demi-chef de partie and are given relatively basic tasks. ideally  over time  a commis will spend a certain period in each section of the kitchen to learn the basics. unaided  a commis may work on the vegetable station of a kitchen.the usual formal training period for a chef is two to four years in catering college. they often spend the summer in work placements. in some cases this is modified to  day-release  courses  a chef will work full-time in a kitchen as an apprentice and then would have allocated days off to attend catering college. these courses can last between one and three years. in the uk  most chefs are trained in the work place  with most doing a formal nvq level 2 or 3 in the work place.   == uniform == the standard uniform for a chef includes a hat called a toque  necktie  double-breasted jacket  apron and shoes with steel or plastic toe-caps. a chef s hat was originally designed as a tall rippled hat called a dodin bouffant or more commonly a toque. the dodin bouffant had 101 ripples that represent the 101 ways that the chef could prepare eggs. the modern chef s hat is tall to allow for the circulation of air above the head and also provides an outlet for heat. the hat helps to prevent sweat from dripping down the face and hair shedding on food. neckties were originally worn to allow for the mopping of sweat from the face  but as this is now against health regulations  they are largely decorative. the chef s neck tie was originally worn on the inside of the jacket to stop sweat running from the face and neck down the body. the jacket is usually white to show off
the chef s cleanliness and repel heat  and is double-breasted to prevent serious injuries from burns and scalds. the double breast also serves to conceal stains on the jacket as one side can be rebuttoned over the other  which is common practice.  an apron is worn to just below knee-length  also to assist in the prevention of burns because of spillage. if hot liquid is spilled onto it  the apron can be quickly removed to minimize burns and scalds. shoes and clogs are hard-wearing and with a steel-top cap to prevent injury from falling objects or knives. according to some hygiene regulations  jewelry is not allowed apart from wedding bands and religious jewelry. if wound dressings are required they should be blue—an unusual colour for foodstuffs—so that they are noticeable if they fall into food. facial hair and longer hair are often required to be netted  or trimmed  for food safety. bandages on the hands are usually covered with nylon gloves. latex is not typically used for food preparation due to latex allergy.   == see also ==   == notes ==   == references == caparoso  randal (march 19  2001).  wine miracles by the bucket . wine lovers page. retrieved august 20  2007. the culinary institute of america (2011). the professional chef (9th ed.). hoboken  new jersey  john wiley & sons. isbn 978-0-470-42135-2. oclc 707248142. piercefield  taylor (may 22  2008)   modern tastes & wine pairing  wine spectator davidson  alan (september 21  2006) [1st ed. 1999].  jaine  tom  davidson  jane  saberi  helen (eds.). the oxford companion to food (2nd ed.). oxford  united kingdom  oxford university press. isbn 978-0-19-280681-9.   == external links ==
nursing is a profession within the health care sector focused on the care of individuals  families  and communities so they may attain  maintain  or recover optimal health and quality of life. nurses may be differentiated from other health care providers by their approach to patient care  training  and scope of practice. nurses practice in many specialties with differing levels of prescription authority. many nurses provide care within the ordering scope of physicians  and this traditional role has shaped the public image of nurses as care providers. however  nurse practitioners are permitted by most jurisdictions to practice independently in a variety of settings. since the postwar period  nurse education has undergone a process of diversification towards advanced and specialized credentials  and many of the traditional regulations and provider roles are changing.nurses develop a plan of care  working collaboratively with physicians  therapists  the patient  the patient s family and other team members  that focuses on treating illness to improve quality of life. in the united states and the united kingdom  advanced practice nurses  such as clinical nurse specialists and nurse practitioners  diagnose health problems and prescribe medications and other therapies  depending on individual state regulations. nurses may help coordinate the patient care performed by other members of a multidisciplinary health care team such as therapists  medical practitioners and dietitians. nurses provide care both interdependently  for example  with physicians  and independently as nursing professionals.   == history ==   === traditional === nursing historians face the challenge of determining whether care provided to the sick or injured in antiquity was nursing care. in the fifth century bc  for example  the hippocratic collection in places describes skilled care and observation of patients by male  attendants  who may have been early nurses. around 600 bc in india  it is recorded in sushruta samhita  book 3  chapter v about the role of the nurse as  the different parts or members of the body as mentioned before including the skin  cannot be correctly described by one who is not well versed in anatomy. hence  any one desirous of acquiring a thorough knowledge of anatomy should prepare a dead body and carefully  observe  by dissecting it  and examine its different parts.  before the foundation of modern nursing  members of religious orders such as nuns and monks often provided nursing-like care. examples exist in christian  islamic and buddhist traditions amongst others. phoebe  mentioned in romans 16 has been described in many sources as  the first visiting nurse . these traditions were influential in the development of the ethos of modern nursing. the religious roots of modern nursing remain in evidence today in many countries. one example in the united kingdom is the use of the historical title  sister  to refer to a senior nurse in the past.during the reformation of the 16th century  protestant reformers
shut down the monasteries and convents  allowing a few hundred municipal hospices to remain in operation in northern europe. those nuns who had been serving as nurses were given pensions or told to get married and stay home. nursing care went to the inexperienced as traditional caretakers  rooted in the roman catholic church  were removed from their positions. the nursing profession suffered a major setback for approximately 200 years.   === 19th century ===  during the crimean war the grand duchess elena pavlovna issued the call for women to join the order of exaltation of the cross (krestodvizhenskaya obshchina) for the year of service in the military hospitals. the first section of twenty-eight  sisters  headed by aleksandra petrovna stakhovich  the directress of the order  went off to the crimea early in november 1854.  florence nightingale laid the foundations of professional nursing after the crimean war. her notes on nursing (1859) became popular. the nightingale model of professional education  having set up the first school of nursing that is connected to a continuously operating hospital and medical school  spread widely in europe and north america after 1870. nightingale was also a pioneer of the graphical presentation of statistical data.other important nurses in the development of the profession include   agnes hunt from shropshire was the first orthopedic nurse and was pivotal in the emergence of the orthopedic hospital the robert jones & agnes hunt hospital in oswestry  shropshire. agnes jones  who established a nurse training regime at the brownlow hill infirmary  liverpool  in 1865. linda richards  who established quality nursing schools in the united states and japan  and was officially the first professionally trained nurse in the us  graduating in 1873 from the new england hospital for women and children in boston. clarissa harlowe  clara  barton  a pioneer american teacher  patent clerk  nurse  and humanitarian  and the founder of the american red cross. saint marianne cope  a sister of st. francis who opened and operated some of the first general hospitals in the united states  instituting cleanliness standards which influenced the development of america s modern hospital system.catholic orders such as little sisters of the poor  sisters of mercy  sisters of st. mary  st. francis health services  inc. and sisters of charity built hospitals and provided nursing services during this period. in turn  the modern deaconess movement began in germany in 1836. within a half century  there were over 5 000 deaconesses in europe.formal use of nurses in the modern military began in the latter half of the nineteenth century. nurses saw active duty in the first boer war  the egyptian campaign (1882)   and the sudan campaign (1883).   === 20th century ===  hospital-based training came to the fore in the early 1900s  with an emphasis on practical experience. the nightingale-style school began to disappear. hospitals and physicians saw women in nursing
as a source of free or inexpensive labor. exploitation of nurses was not uncommon by employers  physicians  and educational providers.many nurses saw active duty in world war i  but the profession was transformed during the second world war. british nurses of the army nursing service were part of every overseas campaign. more nurses volunteered for service in the us army and navy than any other occupation. the nazis had their own brown nurses  40 000 strong. two dozen german red cross nurses were awarded the iron cross for heroism under fire.the modern era saw the development of undergraduate and post-graduate nursing degrees. advancement of nursing research and a desire for association and organization led to the formation of a wide variety of professional organizations and academic journals. growing recognition of nursing as a distinct academic discipline was accompanied by an awareness of the need to define the theoretical basis for practice.in the 19th and early 20th century  nursing was considered a women s profession  just as doctoring was a men s profession. with increasing expectations of workplace equality during the late 20th century  nursing became an officially gender-neutral profession  though in practice the percentage of male nurses remains well below that of female physicians in the early 21st century.   == definition == although nursing practice varies both through its various specialties and countries  these nursing organizations offer the following definitions   nursing encompasses autonomous and collaborative care of individuals of all ages  families  groups and communities  sick or well  and in all settings. nursing includes the promotion of health  prevention of illness  and the care of ill  disabled and dying people. advocacy  promotion of a safe environment  research  participation in shaping health policy and in patient and health systems management  and education are also key nursing roles.  the use of clinical judgment in the provision of care to enable people to improve  maintain  or recover health  to cope with health problems  and to achieve the best possible quality of life  whatever their disease or disability  until death.  nursing is the protection  promotion  and optimization of health and abilities  prevention of illness and injury  alleviation of suffering through the diagnosis and treatment of human responses  and advocacy in health care for individuals  families  communities  and populations.  the unique function of the nurse is to assist the individual  sick or well  in the performance of those activities contributing to health or its recovery (or to peaceful death) that he would perform unaided if he had the necessary strength  will or knowledge.   == as a profession ==  the authority for the practice of nursing is based upon a social contract that delineates professional rights and responsibilities as well as mechanisms for public accountability. in almost all countries  nursing practice is defined and governed by law  and entrance
to the profession is regulated at the national or state level. the aim of the nursing community worldwide is for its professionals to ensure quality care for all  while maintaining their credentials  code of ethics  standards  and competencies  and continuing their education. there are a number of educational paths to becoming a professional nurse  which vary greatly worldwide  all involve extensive study of nursing theory and practice as well as training in clinical skills. nurses care for individuals of all ages and cultural backgrounds who are healthy and ill in a holistic manner based on the individual s physical  emotional  psychological  intellectual  social  and spiritual needs. the profession combines physical science  social science  nursing theory  and technology in caring for those individuals. to work in the nursing profession  all nurses hold one or more credentials depending on their scope of practice and education. in the united states  a licensed practical nurse (lpn) works independently or with a registered nurse (rn). the most significant difference between an lpn and rn is found in the requirements for entry to practice  which determines entitlement for their scope of practice. rns provide scientific  psychological  and technological knowledge in the care of patients and families in many health care settings. rns may earn additional credentials or degrees. in the united states  multiple educational paths will qualify a candidate to sit for the licensure examination as an rn. the associate degree in nursing (adn) is awarded to the nurse who has completed a two-year undergraduate academic degree awarded by community colleges  junior colleges  technical colleges  and bachelor s degree-granting colleges and universities upon completion of a course of study usually lasting two years. it is also referred to as associate in nursing (an)  associate of applied science in nursing (aas)  or associate of science in nursing (asn). the bachelor of science in nursing (bsn) is awarded to the nurse who has earned an american four-year academic degree in the science and principles of nursing  granted by a tertiary education university or similarly accredited school. after completing either the lpn or either rn education programs in the united states  graduates are eligible to sit for a licensing examination to become a nurse  the passing of which is required for the nursing license. the national licensure examination (nclex) test is a standardized exam (including multiple choice  select all that apply  fill in the blank and  hot spot  questions) that nurses take to become licensed. it costs two-hundred dollars to take the nclex. it examines a nurses ability to properly care for a client. study books and practice tests are available for purchase.some nurses follow the traditional role of working in a hospital setting. other options include  pediatrics  neonatal  maternity  obgyn  geriatrics  ambulatory  and nurse anesthetists and informatics (ehealth). there are many other options nurses can explore depending on the type
of degree and education acquired. rns may also pursue different roles as advanced practice nurses. nurses are not doctors  assistants. this is possible in certain situations  but nurses more often are independently caring for their patients or assisting other nurses. rns treat patients  record their medical history  provide emotional support  and provide follow-up care. nurses also help doctors perform diagnostic tests. nurses are almost always working on their own or with other nurses. nurses will assist doctors in the emergency room or in trauma care when help is needed.   === gender issues ===  despite equal opportunity legislation  nursing has continued to be a female-dominated profession. for instance  the male-to-female ratio of nurses is approximately 1 19 in canada and the united states. this ratio is represented around the world. notable exceptions include francophone africa  which includes the countries of benin  burkina faso  cameroon  chad  congo  côte d ivoire  the democratic republic of congo  djibouti  guinea  gabon  mali  mauritania  niger  rwanda  senegal  and togo  which all have more male than female nurses. in europe  in countries such as spain  portugal  czech republic and italy  over 20% of nurses are male. in the united kingdom  11% of nurses and midwives registered with the nursing and midwifery council (nmc) are male. the number of male registered nurses in the united states between 1980 and 2000s doubled.although females are more common  male nurses receive the same pay.   == theory and process ==  nursing practice is the actual provision of nursing care. in providing care  nurses implement the nursing care plan using the nursing process. this is based around a specific nursing theory which is selected in consideration with the care setting and the population served. in providing nursing care  the nurse uses both nursing theory and best practice derived from nursing research.in general terms  the nursing process is the method used to assess and diagnose needs  plan outcomes and interventions  implement interventions  and evaluate the outcomes of the care provided. like other disciplines  the profession has developed different theories derived from sometimes diverse philosophical beliefs and paradigms or worldviews to help nurses direct their activities to accomplish specific goals.   == scope of activities ==   === activities of daily living assistance ===  assisting in activities of daily living (adl) are skills required in nursing as well as other professions such as nursing assistants. this includes assisting in patient mobility  such as moving an activity intolerant patient within bed. for hygiene  this often involves bed baths and assisting with urinary and bowel elimination.   === medication === nurses do not have the authority to prescribe medications  although there are some exceptions. all medications administered by nurses must be from a medication prescription from a licensed practitioner  such as a physician. nurses are legally responsible for
the drugs they administer. there may be legal implications when there is an error in a prescription  and the nurse could be expected to have noted and reported the error. in the united states  nurses have the right to refuse any medication administration that they deem to be potentially harmful to the patient. in the united kingdom there are some nurses who have taken additional specialist training that allows them to prescribe any medications from their scope of practice.   === patient education ===  the patient s family is often involved in the education. effective patient education leads to fewer complications and hospital visits.   == specialties and practice settings ==  nursing is the most diverse of all health care professions. nurses practice in a wide range of settings but generally nursing is divided depending on the needs of the person being nursed. the major populations are   communities/public family/individual across the lifespan adult-gerontology pediatrics neonatal women s health/gender-related mental health informatics (ehealth)there are also specialist areas such as cardiac nursing  orthopedic nursing  palliative care  perioperative nursing  obstetrical nursing  oncology nursing  nursing informatics  telenursing and emergency nursing. nurses practice in a wide range of settings  including hospitals  private homes  schools  and pharmaceutical companies. nurses work in occupational health settings (also called industrial health settings)  free-standing clinics and physician offices  nurse-led clinics  long-term care facilities and camps. they also work on cruise ships and in military service. nurses act as advisers and consultants to the health care and insurance industries. many nurses also work in the health advocacy and patient advocacy fields at companies such as health advocate  inc. helping in a variety of clinical and administrative issues. some are attorneys and others work with attorneys as legal nurse consultants  reviewing patient records to assure that adequate care was provided and testifying in court. nurses can work on a temporary basis  which involves doing shifts without a contract in a variety of settings  sometimes known as per diem nursing  agency nursing or travel nursing. nurses work as researchers in laboratories  universities  and research institutions. nurses have also been delving into the world of informatics  acting as consultants to the creation of computerized charting programs and other software.   == occupational hazards ==  internationally  there is a serious shortage of nurses. one reason for this shortage is due to the work environment in which nurses practice. in a recent review of the empirical human factors and ergonomic literature specific to nursing performance  nurses were found to work in generally poor environmental conditions. some countries and states have passed legislation regarding acceptable nurse-to-patient ratios. the fast-paced and unpredictable nature of health care places nurses at risk for injuries and illnesses  including high occupational stress. nursing is a particularly stressful profession  and nurses consistently identify stress as a major work-related concern and have among the highest levels of occupational stress when
compared to other professions. this stress is caused by the environment  psychosocial stressors  and the demands of nursing  including new technology that must be mastered  the emotional labor involved in nursing  physical labor  shift work  and high workload. this stress puts nurses at risk for short-term and long-term health problems  including sleep disorders  depression  mortality  psychiatric disorders  stress-related illnesses  and illness in general. nurses are at risk of developing compassion fatigue and moral distress  which can worsen mental health. they also have very high rates of occupational burnout (40%) and emotional exhaustion (43.2%). burnout and exhaustion increase the risk for illness  medical error  and suboptimal care provision.nurses are also at risk for violence and abuse in the workplace. violence is typically perpetrated by non-staff (e.g. patients or family)  whereas abuse is typically perpetrated by other hospital personnel. of american nurses  57% reported in 2011 that they had been threatened at work  17% were physically assaulted.   === prevention === there are a number of interventions that can mitigate the occupational hazards of nursing. they can be individual-focused or organization-focused. individual-focused interventions include stress management programs  which can be customized to individuals. stress management programs can reduce anxiety  sleep disorders  and other symptoms of stress. organizational interventions focus on reducing stressful aspects of the work environment by defining stressful characteristics and developing solutions to them. using organizational and individual interventions together is most effective at reducing stress on nurses.   == worldwide ==   === australia ===  catholic religious institutes were influential in the development of australian nursing  founding many of australia s hospitals – the irish sisters of charity were first to arrive in 1838 and established st vincent s hospital  sydney in 1857 as a free hospital for the poor. they and other orders like the sisters of mercy  and in aged care the sisters of the little company of mary and little sisters of the poor founded hospitals  hospices  research institutes and aged care facilities around australia.a census in the 1800s found several hundred nurses working in western australia during the colonial period of history  this included aboriginal female servants who cared for the infirm.the state nursing licensing bodies amalgamated in australia in 2011 under the federal body ahpra (australian health practitioner registration authority). several divisions of nursing license is available and recognized around the country.  enrolled nurses may initiate some oral medication orders with a specific competency now included in national curricula but variable in application by agency. registered nurses hold a university degree (enrolled nurses can progress to registered nurse status and do get credit for previous study). nurse practitioners have started emerging from postgraduate programs and work in private practice. mental health nurses must complete further training as advanced mental health practitioners in order to administer client referrals under the mental health act.australia enjoys the luxury of a national curriculum for vocational nurses 
trained at technical and further education (tafe) colleges or private registered training organization (rto). enrolled and registered nurses are identified by the department of immigration as an occupational area of need  although registered nurses are always in shorter supply  and this increases in proportion with specialization. in 1986 there were a number of rolling industrial actions around the country  culminating when five thousand victorian nurses went on strike for eighteen days. the hospitals were able to function by hiring casual staff from each other s striking members  but the increased cost forced a decision in the nurses  favor    === european union === in the european union  the profession of nurse is regulated. a profession is said to be regulated when access and exercise is subject to the possession of a specific professional qualification. the regulated professions database contains a list of regulated professions for nurse in the european union (eu) member states  european economic area (eea) countries  and switzerland. this list is covered by the directive 2005/36/ec.   === iran === see nursing in iran   === united kingdom ===  to practice lawfully as a registered nurse in the united kingdom  the practitioner must hold a current and valid registration with the nursing and midwifery council. the title  registered nurse  can only be granted to those holding such registration. this protected title is laid down in the nurses  midwives and health visitors act  1997. from april 2016  nurses in the united kingdom are expected to revalidate every three years which involves providing evidence of further development and active practice.   ==== first and second level ==== first-level nurses make up the bulk of the registered nurses in the uk. they were previously known by titles such as registered general nurse (rgn)  registered sick children s nurse (rscn)  registered mental nurse (rmn)  and registered nurse (for the) mentally handicapped (rnmh). the titles used now are similar  including registered nurse adult (rna)  registered nurse child (rnc)  registered nurse mental health (rnmh)  and registered nurse (of) learning disabilities (rnld). second-level nurse training is no longer provided  however  they are still legally able to practice in the united kingdom as a registered nurse. many have now either retired or undertaken conversion courses to become first-level nurses. they are entitled to refer to themselves as registered nurses as their registration is on the nursing & midwifery council register of nurses  although most refer to themselves as enrolled nurses (ens) or state enrolled nurses (sens).   ==== advanced practice ==== nurse practitioners – most of these nurses obtain a minimum of a master s degree and a desired post grad certificate. they often perform roles similar to those of physicians and physician assistants. they can prescribe medications as independent or supplementary prescribers  although they are still legally regulated  unlike physician s assistants. most nurse practitioners (nps) have referral and admission rights to hospital specialties.
they commonly work in primary care (e.g. general practitioner (gp) surgeries)   accident and emergency (a&e) departments  or pediatrics although they are increasingly being seen in other areas of practice. in the uk  the title  nurse practitioner  is legally protected. specialist community public health nurses – traditionally district nurses and health visitors  this group oversees research and publication activities. lecturer-practitioners (also called practice education facilitators) – these nurses work both in the national health service (nhs)  and in universities. they typically work 2–3 days per week in each setting. in university  they train pre-registration student nurses (see below)  and often teach on specialist courses post-registration nurses. lecturers – these nurses are not employed by the nhs. instead they work full-time in universities  both teaching and performing research.   ==== managers ==== many nurses who have worked in clinical settings for a long time choose to leave clinical nursing and join the ranks of the nhs management. this used to be seen as a natural career progression for those who had reached ward management positions  however with the advent of specialist nursing roles (see above)  this has become a less attractive option. nonetheless  many nurses fill positions in the senior management structure of nhs organizations  some even as board members. others choose to stay a little closer to their clinical roots by becoming clinical nurse managers or modern matrons.   ==== nurse education ====   ===== pre-registration ===== to become a registered nurse  one must complete a program recognised by the nursing and midwifery council (nmc). currently  this involves completing a degree  available from a range of universities offering these courses  in the chosen branch specialty (see below)  leading to both an academic award and professional registration as a 1st level registered nurse. such a course is a 50/50 split of learning in university (i.e. through lectures  assignments and examinations) and in practice (i.e. supervised patient care within a hospital or community setting). these courses are three (occasionally four) years  long. the first year is known as the common foundation program (cfp)  and teaches the basic knowledge and skills required of all nurses. skills included in the cfp may include communication  taking observations  administering medication and providing personal care to patients. the remainder of the program consists of training specific to the student s chosen branch of nursing. these are   adult nursing. child nursing. mental health nursing. learning disabilities nursing.as of 2013  the nursing and midwifery council will require all new nurses qualifying in the uk to hold a degree qualification. however  those nurses who hold a diploma  or even a certificate in nursing are still able to legally practice in the uk  although they are able to undertake university modules to obtain enough credits to top up to a degree. midwifery training is similar in length and structure  but is sufficiently different that it is not considered a
branch of nursing. there are shortened (18 month) programs to allow nurses already qualified in the adult branch to hold dual registration as a nurse and a midwife. shortened courses lasting 2 years also exist for graduates of other disciplines to train as nurses. this is achieved by more intense study and a shortening of the common foundation program.as of 2016 student nurses in england and wales can apply for a bursary from the government to support them during their nurse training  and may also be eligible for a student loan  although there has been speculation that this will not be available in the future. student nurses in scotland still receive a standard bursary which is not means tested  and their tuition fees continue to be paid – however  they are not eligible for student loans. before project 2000  nurse education was the responsibility of hospitals and was not based in universities  hence many nurses who qualified prior to these reforms do not hold an academic award.   ===== post-registration ===== after the point of initial registration  there is an expectation that all qualified nurses will continue to update their skills and knowledge. the nursing and midwifery council insists on a minimum of 35 hours of education every three years  as part of its post registration education and practice (prep) requirements.there are also opportunities for many nurses to gain additional clinical skills after qualification. cannulation  venipuncture  intravenous drug therapy and male catheterization are the most common  although there are many others (such as advanced life support)  which some nurses undertake. many nurses who qualified with a diploma choose to upgrade their qualification to a degree by studying part-time. many nurses prefer this option to gaining a degree initially  as there is often an opportunity to study in a specialist field as a part of this upgrading. financially  in england  it was also much more lucrative  as diploma students get the full bursary during their initial training  and employers often pay for the degree course as well as the nurse s salary.to become specialist nurses (such as nurse consultants  nurse practitioners etc.) or nurse educators  some nurses undertake further training above bachelor s degree level. master s degrees exist in various healthcare related topics  and some nurses choose to study for phds or other higher academic awards. district nurses and health visitors are also considered specialist nurses  and to become such they must undertake specialist training. this is a one-year full-time degree. all newly qualifying district nurses and health visitors are trained to prescribe from the nurse prescribers  formulary  a list of medications and dressings typically useful to those carrying out these roles. many of these (and other) nurses will also undertake training in independent and supplementary prescribing  which allows them (as of 1 may 2006) to prescribe almost any drug in the british national formulary. this has been the cause of a great deal of debate in
both medical and nursing circles.   === canada ===   ==== history ==== canadian nursing dates back to 1639 in quebec with the augustine nuns. these nuns were trying to open a mission that cared for the spiritual and physical needs of patients. the establishment of this mission created the first nursing apprenticeship training in north america. in the nineteenth century  some catholic orders of nursing were trying to spread their message across canada. most nurses were female and only had an occasional consultation with a physician. towards the end of the nineteenth century  hospital care and medical services had been improved and expanded. much of this was due to nightingale s influence. in 1874 the first formal nursing training program was started at the general and marine hospital in st. catharines in ontario.   ==== education ==== all canadian nurses and prospective nurses are heavily encouraged by the canadian nurses association to continue their education to receive a bachelor s degree. this degree may result in better patient outcomes. all canadian provinces and territories  with the exception of the yukon and quebec  require that all nurses have a bachelor s degree. the length of time generally required to obtain this degree is four years. however  some canadian universities offer a condensed program that is two years in length.nursing specialty certification is available through the canadian nurses association in 22 practice areas  including   cardiovascular nursing community health nursing critical care nursing pediatric critical care nursing emergency nursing gastroenterology nursing gerontological nursing hospice palliative care nursing medical-surgical nursing neonatal nursing nephrology nursing neuroscience nursing occupational health nursing oncology nursing orthopedic nursing pediatric nursing peri-anesthesia nursing perinatal nursing peri-operative nursing psychiatric and mental health nursing rehabilitation nursing wound  ostomy and continence nursingnursing specialty certification generally requires practice experience and passing a test that is based on competencies for that specific medical or surgical domain in which nursing care is provided. the certification in gerontological nursing  which involves providing care to the elderly  is offered to not only rns and nps but also lpns.   === japan ===   ==== history ==== nursing was not an established part of japan s healthcare system until 1899 with the midwives ordinance. from there the registered nurse ordinance came into play in 1915. this established a legal substantiation to registered nurses all over japan. a new law geared towards nurses was created during world war ii  the public health nurse  midwife and nurse law  established in 1948. it established educational requirements  standards and licensure. there has been a continued effort to improve nursing in japan. in 1992 the nursing human resource law was passed. this law created the development of new university programs for nurses. those programs were designed to raise the education level of the nurses so that they could be better suited for taking care of the public.   ==== types of nurses ==== japan only recognizes four types of nursing and they are public
health nursing  midwifery  registered nursing and assistant nursing.   ===== public health ===== this type of nursing is designed to help the public and is also driven by the public s needs. the goals of public health nurses are to monitor the spread of disease  keep vigilant watch for environmental hazards  educate the community on how to care for and treat themselves  and train for community disasters.   ===== midwifery ===== nurses that are involved with midwifery are independent of any organization. a midwife takes care of a pregnant woman during labour and postpartum. they assist with things like breastfeeding and caring for the child.   ===== nursing assistant ===== individuals who are assistant nurses follow orders from a registered nurse. they report back to the licensed nurse about a patient s condition. assistant nurses are always supervised by a licensed registered nurse.   ==== education ==== in 1952 japan established the first nursing university in the country. an associate degree was the only level of certification for years. soon people began to want nursing degrees at a higher level of education. soon the bachelor s degree in nursing (bsn) was established. currently  japan offers doctorate-level degrees of nursing in a good number of its universities. there are three ways that an individual could become a registered nurse in japan. after obtaining a high school degree the person could go to a nursing university for four years and earn a bachelor s degree  go to a junior nursing college for three years or go to a nursing school for three years. regardless of where the individual attends school they must take the national exam. those who attended a nursing university have a bit of an advantage over those who went to a nursing school. they can take the national exam to be a registered nurse  public health nurse or midwife. in the cases of becoming a midwife or a public health nurse  the student must take a one-year course in their desired field after attending a nursing university and passing the national exam to become a registered nurse. the nursing universities are the best route for someone who wants to become a nurse in japan. they offer a wider range of general education classes and they also allow for a more rigid teaching style of nursing. these nursing universities train their students to be able to make critical and educated decisions when they are out in the field. physicians are the ones who are teaching the potential nurses because there are not enough available nurses to teach students. this increases the dominance that physicians have over nurses. students that attend a nursing college or just a nursing school receive the same degree as one who graduated from a nursing university would  but they do not have the same educational background. the classes offered at nursing colleges and nursing schools are focused on more practical aspects of nursing. these institutions do not offer many general education classes  so
students who attend these schools will solely be focusing on their nursing educations while they are in school. students who attend a nursing college or school do have the opportunity to become a midwife or a public health nurse. they have to go through a training institute for their desired field after graduating from the nursing school or college. japanese nurses never have to renew their licenses. once they have passed their exam  they have their license for life.   ==== today ==== like the united states  japan is in need of more nurses. the driving force behind this need is the fact that country is aging and needs more medical care for its people. however  the number of available nurses does not seem to be increasing. nurses face poor working conditions and low social status  and there is a cultural idea that married women quit their jobs for family responsibilities. on average  japanese nurses make around 280 000 yen a month  and it is one of the higher paying jobs. however  physicians make twice as much as nurses. similar to other cultures  the japanese people view nurses as subservient to physicians. according to the american nurses association article on japan   nursing work has been described using negative terminology such as  hard  dirty  dangerous  low salary  few holidays  minimal chance of marriage and family  and poor image.  there are organizations that unite japanese nurses like the japanese nursing association (jna)  the jna is a professional organization and not a union. members of the jna lobby politicians and produces publications about nursing. according to the american nurses association s article on japan  the jna  works toward the improvement in nursing practice through many activities including the development of a policy research group to influence policy development  a code of ethics for nurses  and standards of nursing practice.  the jna also provides certification for specialists in mental health  oncology and community health.  there are other organizations  including some that categorize nurses by specialty  like emergency nursing or disaster nursing. one of the older unions that relates to nursing is the japanese federation of medical workers union  which was created in 1957. it is a union that includes physicians as well as nurses. this organization was involved with the nursing human resource law.   === spain === see nursing in spain   === taiwan ===  in taiwan  the ministry of health and welfare is in charge of the regulation of nursing. the taiwan union of nurses association (tuna) is the union unit in taiwan  fighting for nurses on payment and working time issues.   === united states ===  in the us  scope of practice is determined by the state or territory in which a nurse is licensed. each state has its own laws  rules  and regulations governing nursing care. usually the making of such rules
and regulations is delegated to a state board of nursing  which performs day-to-day administration of these rules  licenses for nurses and nursing assistants  and makes decisions on nursing issues. in some states  the terms  nurse  or  nursing  may only be used in conjunction with the practice of a registered nurse (rn) or licensed practical or vocational nurse (lpn/lvn). in the hospital setting  registered nurses often delegate tasks to lpns and unlicensed assistive personnel. rns are not limited to employment as bedside nurses. they are employed by physicians  attorneys  insurance companies  governmental agencies  community/public health agencies  private industry  school districts  ambulatory surgery centers  among others. some registered nurses are independent consultants who work for themselves  while others work for large manufacturers or chemical companies. research nurses conduct or assist in the conduct of research or evaluation (outcome and process) in many areas such as biology  psychology  human development  and health care systems. many employers offer flexible work schedules  child care  educational benefits  and bonuses. about 21 percent of registered nurses are union members or covered by union contract.nursing is the nation s largest health care profession  with more than 3.1 million registered nurses nationwide. of all licensed rns  2.6 million or 84.8% are employed in nursing. nurses comprise the largest single component of hospital staff  are the primary providers of hospital patient care  and deliver most of the nation s long-term care. the primary pathway to professional nursing  as compared to technical-level practice  is the four-year bachelor of science in nursing (bsn) degree. registered nurses are prepared either through a bsn program  a three-year associate degree in nursing  or a three-year hospital training program  receiving a hospital diploma. all take the same state licensing exam. (the number of diploma programs has declined steadily—to less than 10 percent of all basic rn education programs—as nursing education has shifted from hospital-operated instruction into the college and university system.)   ==== educational and licensure requirements ====   ===== diploma in nursing =====  the oldest method of nursing education is the hospital-based diploma program  which lasts approximately three years. students take between 30 and 60 credit hours in anatomy  physiology  microbiology  nutrition  chemistry  and other subjects at a college or university  then move on to intensive nursing classes. until 1996  most rns in the us were initially educated in nursing by diploma programs. according to the health services resources administration s 2000 survey of nurses only six percent of nurses who graduated from nursing programs in the united states received their education at a diploma school of nursing.   ===== associate degree in nursing =====  the most common initial nursing education is a two-year associate degree in nursing (associate of applied science in nursing  associate of science in nursing  associate degree in nursing)  a two-year college degree referred
to as an adn. some four-year colleges and universities also offer the adn. associate degree nursing programs have prerequisite and corequisite courses (which may include english  math and human anatomy and physiology) and ultimately stretch out the degree-acquiring process to about three years or greater.   ===== bachelor of science in nursing =====  the third method is to obtain a bachelor of science in nursing (bsn)  a four-year degree that also prepares nurses for graduate-level education. for the first two years in a bsn program  students usually obtain general education requirements and spend the remaining time in nursing courses. in some new programs the first two years can be substituted for an active lpn license along with the required general studies. advocates for the adn and diploma programs state that such programs have an on the job training approach to educating students  while the bsn is an academic degree that emphasizes research and nursing theory. some states require a specific amount of clinical experience that is the same for both bsn and adn students. a bsn degree qualifies its holder for administrative  research  consulting and teaching positions that would not usually be available to those with an adn  but is not necessary for most patient care functions. nursing schools may be accredited by either the accreditation commission for education in nursing (acen) or the commission on collegiate nursing education (ccne).   ===== graduate education =====  advanced education in nursing is done at the master s and doctoral levels. it prepares the graduate for specialization as an advanced practice registered nurse (aprn) or for advanced roles in leadership  management  or education. the clinical nurse leader (cnl) is an advanced generalist who focuses on the improvement of quality and safety outcomes for patients or patient populations from an administrative and staff management focus. doctoral programs in nursing prepare the student for work in nursing education  health care administration  clinical research  public policy  or advanced clinical practice. most programs confer the phd in nursing or doctor of nursing practice (dnp). advanced practice registered nurse (aprn) areas of advanced nursing practice include that of a nurse practitioner (np)  a certified nurse midwife (cnm)  a certified registered nurse anesthetist (crna)  or a clinical nurse specialist (cns). nurse practitioners and cnss work assessing  diagnosing and treating patients in fields as diverse as family practice  women s health care  emergency nursing  acute/critical care  psychiatry  geriatrics  or pediatrics  additionally  a cns usually works for a facility to improve patient care  do research  or as a staff educator.   ==== licensure examination ==== completion of any one of these three educational routes allows a graduate nurse to take the nclex-rn  the test for licensure as a registered nurse  and is accepted by every state as an adequate indicator of minimum competency for a new graduate. however  controversy exists over the appropriate entry-level preparation of rns. some
professional organizations believe the bsn should be the sole method of rn preparation and adn graduates should be licensed as  technical nurses  to work under the supervision of bsn graduates. others feel the on-the-job experiences of diploma and adn graduates makes up for any deficiency in theoretical preparation.   ==== shortage in the united states ====  rns are the largest group of health care workers in the united states  with about 2.7 million employed in 2011. it has been reported that the number of new graduates and foreign-trained nurses is insufficient to meet the demand for registered nurses  this is often referred to as the nursing shortage and is expected to increase for the foreseeable future. there are data to support the idea that the nursing shortage is a voluntary shortage. in other words  nurses are leaving nursing of their own volition. in 2006 it was estimated that approximately 1.8 million nurses chose not to work as a nurse. the bureau of labor statistics (bls) reported that 296 900 healthcare jobs were created in 2011. rns make up the majority of the healthcare work force  therefore these positions will be filled primarily by nurses. the bls also states that by 2020  there will be 1.2 million nursing job openings due to an increase in the workforce  and replacements.   ===== causes ===== the international council of nursing (icn)  the largest international health professional organization in the world  recognizes the shortage of nurses as a growing crisis in the world. this shortage impacts the healthcare of everyone worldwide. one of the many reasons is that nurses who pursue to become nurses do so very late in their lives. this leads to a non-lengthy employment time. a national survey prepared by the federation of nurses and health professionals in 2001 found that one in five nurses plans to leave the profession within five years because of unsatisfactory working conditions  including low pay  severe under staffing  high stress  physical demands  mandatory overtime  and irregular hours. approximately 29.8 percent of all nursing jobs are found in hospitals. however  because of administrative cost cutting  increased nurse s workload  and rapid growth of outpatient services  hospital nursing jobs will experience slower than average growth. employment in home care and nursing homes is expected to grow rapidly. though more people are living well into their 80s and 90s  many need the kind of long-term care available at a nursing home. many nurses will also be needed to help staff the growing number of out-patient facilities  such as hmos (health maintenance organizations)  group medical practices  and ambulatory surgery centers. nursing specialties will be in great demand. there are  in addition  many part-time employment possibilities.levsey  campbell  and green voiced their concern about the shortage of nurses  citing fang  wilsey-wisniewski  & bednash  2006  who state that over 40 000 qualified nursing applicants were turned away in
the 2005–2006 academic year from baccalaureate nursing programs due to a lack of masters and doctoral qualified faculty  and that this number was increased over 9 000 from 32 000 qualified but rejected students from just two years earlier. several strategies have been offered to mitigate this shortage including  federal and private support for experienced nurses to enhance their education  incorporating more hybrid/blended nursing courses  and using simulation in lieu of clinical (hospital) training experiences.furthermore  there is a shortage of academically qualified instructors to teach at schools of nursing worldwide. the serious need for educational capacity is not being met  which is the underlying most important preparation resource for the nurses of tomorrow. the decrease in faculty everywhere is due to many factors including decrease in satisfaction with the workforce  poor salaries  and reduction in full-time equivalent. throughout the span of 6 years the nursing faculty shortage has been written about an increasing amount. there is no clear consensus or an organized plan on how to fix the ongoing issue.   ==== continuing education ==== with health care knowledge growing steadily  nurses can stay ahead of the curve through continuing education. continuing education classes and programs enable nurses to provide the best possible care to patients  advance nursing careers  and keep up with board of nursing requirements. the american nurses association and the american nursing credentialing center are devoted to ensuring nurses have access to quality continuing education offerings. continuing education classes are calibrated to provide enhanced learning for all levels of nurses. many states also regulate continuing nursing education. nursing licensing boards requiring continuing nursing education (cne) as a condition for licensure  either initial or renewal  accept courses provided by organizations that are accredited by other state licensing boards  by the american nursing credentialing center (ancc)  or by organizations that have been designated as an approver of continuing nursing education by ancc. there are some exceptions to this rule including the state of california  florida and kentucky. national healthcare institute has created a list to assist nurses in determining their cne credit hours requirements. while this list is not all inclusive  it offers details on how to contact nursing licensing boards directly.   ==== board certification ====  professional nursing organizations  through their certification boards  have voluntary certification exams to demonstrate clinical competency in their particular specialty. completion of the prerequisite work experience allows an rn to register for an examination  and passage gives an rn permission to use a professional designation after their name. for example  passage of the american association of critical-care nurses specialty exam allows a nurse to use the initials  ccrn  after his or her name. other organizations and societies have similar procedures. the american nurses credentialing center  the credentialing arm of the american nurses association  is the largest nursing credentialing organization and administers more than 30 specialty examinations.   === india === the nursing education is governed in
india by the central body indian nursing council and its norms are implemented through respective state nursing council such as kerala nurses and midwives council.   == see also ==   == references ==   == bibliography == rosseter  r. (6 august 2012).  media relations/ nursing shortage . american association of colleges of nursing.   == further reading == fitzpatrick  joyce j. (24 august 2011).  fitzpatrick  joyce j.  kazer  meredith (eds.). encyclopedia of nursing research (3rd ed.). isbn 978-0826107503. hardy  susan  corones  anthony (2017).  the nurse s uniform as ethopoietic fashion . fashion theory. 21 (5)  523–552. doi 10.1080/1362704x.2016.1203090. longe  jacqueline  ed. gale encyclopedia of nursing and allied health (6 vol. 2013)   === historical === bullough  vern l. and bonnie bullough. the emergence of modern nursing (2nd ed. 1972) d antonio  patricia. american nursing  a history of knowledge  authority  and the meaning of work (2010)  272pp. dock  lavinia lloyd. a short history of nursing from the earliest times to the present day (1920) full text online  abbreviated version of her four volume a history of nursing vol 3 online donahue  m. patricia. nursing  the finest art  an illustrated history (3rd ed. 2010)  includes over 400 illustrations  416pp  excerpt and text search fairman  julie and joan e. lynaugh. critical care nursing  a history (2000) excerpt and text search judd  deborah. a history of american nursing  trends and eras (2009) 272pp excerpt and text search kalisch  philip a.  and beatrice j. kalisch.  advance of american nursing  (3rd ed 1995)   4th ed 2003 is titled  american nursing  a history snodgrass  mary ellen. historical encyclopedia of nursing (2004)  354pp  from ancient times to the present   == external links == uncg library betty h. carter women veterans historical project  nurse  nursing  . encyclopædia britannica (11th ed.). 1911.
a priest or priestess is a religious leader authorized to perform the sacred rituals of a religion  especially as a mediatory agent between humans and one or more deities. they also have the authority or power to administer religious rites  in particular  rites of sacrifice to  and propitiation of  a deity or deities. their office or position is the priesthood  a term which also may apply to such persons collectively.   == description == according to the trifunctional hypothesis of prehistoric proto-indo-european society  priests have existed since the earliest of times and in the simplest societies  most likely as a result of agricultural surplus and consequent social stratification.  the necessity to read sacred texts and keep temple or church records helped foster literacy in many early societies.   priests exist in many religions today  such as all or some branches of judaism  christianity  buddhism  shinto and hinduism.  they are generally regarded as having privileged contact with the deity or deities of the religion to which they subscribe  often interpreting the meaning of events and performing the rituals of the religion. there is no common definition of the duties of priesthood between faiths  but generally it includes mediating the relationship between one s congregation  worshippers  and other members of the religious body  and its deity or deities  and administering religious rituals and rites. these often include blessing worshipers with prayers of joy at marriages  after a birth  and at consecrations  teaching the wisdom and dogma of the faith at any regular worship service  and mediating and easing the experience of grief and death at funerals – maintaining a spiritual connection to the afterlife in faiths where such a concept exists. administering religious building grounds and office affairs and papers  including any religious library or collection of sacred texts  is also commonly a responsibility – for example  the modern term for clerical duties in a secular office refers originally to the duties of a cleric. the question of which religions have a  priest  depends on how the titles of leaders are used or translated into english. in some cases  leaders are more like those that other believers will often turn to for advice on spiritual matters  and less of a  person authorized to perform the sacred rituals.  for example  clergy in roman catholicism and eastern orthodoxy are priests  but in protestant christianity they are typically minister and pastor. the terms priest and priestess are sufficiently generic that they may be used in an anthropological sense to describe the religious mediators of an unknown or otherwise unspecified religion. in many religions  being a priest or priestess is a full-time position  ruling out any other career. many christian priests and pastors choose or are mandated to dedicate themselves to their churches and receive their living directly from their churches. in other cases it is a part-time role.
for example  in the early history of iceland the chieftains were titled goði  a word meaning  priest . as seen in the saga of hrafnkell freysgoði  however  being a priest consisted merely of offering periodic sacrifices to the norse gods and goddesses  it was not a full-time role  nor did it involve ordination. in some religions  being a priest or priestess is by human election or human choice. in judaism the priesthood is inherited in familial lines. in a theocracy  a society is governed by its priesthood.   == etymology == the word  priest  is ultimately derived from greek via latin presbyter  the term for  elder  especially elders of jewish or christian communities in late antiquity. the latin presbyter ultimately represents greek πρεσβύτερος presbúteros  the regular latin word for  priest  being sacerdos  corresponding to ἱερεύς hiereús. it is possible that the latin word was loaned into old english  and only from old english reached other germanic languages via the anglo-saxon mission to the continent  giving old icelandic prestr  old swedish präster  old high german priast. old high german also has the disyllabic priester  priestar  apparently derived from latin independently via old french presbtre. αn alternative theory makes priest cognate with old high german priast  prest  from vulgar latin *prevost  one put over others  from latin praepositus  person placed in charge .that english should have only the single term priest to translate presbyter and sacerdos came to be seen as a problem in english bible translations. the presbyter is the minister who both presides and instructs a christian congregation  while the sacerdos  offerer of sacrifices  or in a christian context the eucharist  performs  mediatorial offices between god and man .the feminine english noun  priestess  was coined in the 17th century  to refer to female priests of the pre-christian religions of classical antiquity. in the 20th century  the word was used in controversies surrounding the women ordained in the anglican communion  who are referred to as  priests  irrespective of gender  and the term priestess is generally considered archaic in christianity.   == historical religions ==  in historical polytheism  a priest administers the sacrifice to a deity  often in highly elaborate ritual. in the ancient near east  the priesthood also acted on behalf of the deities in managing their property. priestesses in antiquity often performed sacred prostitution  and in ancient greece  some priestesses such as pythia  priestess at delphi  acted as oracles.   === ancient priests and priestesses === sumerian en (akkadian  entu) were top-ranking priestesses who were distinguished with special ceremonial attire and held equal status to high priests. they owned property  transacted business  and initiated the hieros gamos with priests and kings. enheduanna (2285–2250 bce) was the first known holder of the title en. nadītu served as
priestesses in the temples of inanna in the city of uruk. they were recruited from the highest families in the land and were supposed to remain childless  owned property  and transacted business. the sumerian word nin  ereš in akkadian  is the sign for  lady.  nin.dingir (akkadian entu)  literally  divine lady  a priestess. in sumerian epic texts such as  enmerkar and the lord of aratta  nu-gig were priestesses in temples dedicated to inanna and may be a reference to the goddess herself. puabi of ur was an akkadian queen regnant or a priestess. in several other sumerian city-states  the ruling governor or king was also a head priest with the rank of ensi  such as at lagash. control of the holy city of nippur and its temple priesthood generally meant hegemony over most of sumer  as listed on the sumerian king list  at one point  the nippur priesthood conferred the title of queen of sumer on kugbau  a popular taverness from nearby kish (who was later deified as kubaba). in the hebrew bible  hebrew  קְדֵשָׁה‎ qědēšā  derived from the root q-d-š were sacred prostitutes usually associated with the goddess asherah. quadishtu served in the temples of the sumerian goddess qetesh. ishtaritu specialized in the arts of dancing  music  and singing and they served in the temples of ishtar. in the epic of gilgamesh  priestess shamhat  a temple prostitute  tamed wild enkidu after  six days and seven nights.  gerarai  fourteen athenian matrons of dionysus  presided over sacrifices and participated in the festivals of anthesteria.   === ancient egypt === in ancient egyptian religion  the right and obligation to interact with the gods belonged to the pharaoh. he delegated this duty to priests  who were effectively bureaucrats authorized to act on his behalf. priests staffed temples throughout egypt  giving offerings to the cult images in which the gods were believed to take up residence and performing other rituals for their benefit. little is known about what training may have been required of priests  and the selection of personnel for positions was affected by a tangled set of traditions  although the pharaoh had the final say. in the new kingdom of egypt  when temples owned great estates  the high priests of the most important cult—that of amun at karnak—were important political figures.high-ranking priestly roles were usually held by men. women were generally relegated to lower positions in the temple hierarchy  although some held specialized and influential positions  especially that of the god s wife of amun  whose religious importance overshadowed the high priests of amun in the late period.   === ancient rome ===  in ancient rome and throughout italy  the ancient sanctuaries of ceres and proserpina were invariably led by female sacerdotes  drawn from women of local and roman elites. it was the only public priesthood attainable by roman matrons and
was held in great honor. a roman matron was any mature woman of the upper class  married or unmarried. females could serve public cult as vestal virgins but few were chosen  and then only from young maidens of the upper class.   === ancient greece === the pythia was the title of a priestess at the very ancient temple of delphi that was dedicated to the earth mother. she was widely credited for her prophecies. the priestess retained her role when the temple was rededicated to apollo  giving her a prominence unusual for a woman in the male-dominated culture of classical greece. the phrygian sibyl was the priestess presiding over an apollonian oracle at phrygia  a historical kingdom in the anatolian highlands.   == abrahamic religions ==   === judaism ===  in ancient israel the priests were required by the law of moses to be of direct patrilineal descent from aaron  moses  elder brother. in exodus 30 22–25 god instructs moses to make a holy anointing oil to consecrate the priests  for all of eternity.  during the times of the two jewish temples in jerusalem  the aaronic priests were responsible for the daily and special jewish holiday offerings and sacrifices within the temples  these offerings are known as the korbanot. in hebrew the word  priest  is kohen (singular כהן kohen  plural כּהנִים kohanim)  hence the family names cohen  cahn  kahn  kohn  kogan  etc. these families are from the tribe of levi (levites) and in twenty-four instances are called by scripture as such (jerusalem talmud to mishnaic tractate maaser sheini p. 31a). in hebrew the word for  priesthood  is kehunnah. since the destruction of the second temple  and (therefore) the cessation of the daily and seasonal temple ceremonies and sacrifices  kohanim in traditional judaism (orthodox judaism and to some extent  conservative judaism) continue to perform a number of priestly ceremonies and roles such as the pidyon haben (redemption of a first-born son) ceremony and the priestly blessing  and have remained subject  particularly in orthodox judaism  to a number of restrictions  such as restrictions on certain marriages and ritual purity (see kohanic disqualifications). orthodox judaism regard the kohanim as being held in reserve for a future restored temple. in all branches of judaism  kohanim do not perform roles of propitiation  sacrifice  or sacrament. rather  a kohen s principal religious function is to perform the priestly blessing  and  provided he is rabbinically qualified  to serve as an authoritative judge (posek) and expositor of jewish halakha law.   === christianity ===  with the spread of christianity and the formation of parishes  the greek word ἱερεύς (hiereus)  and latin sacerdos  which christians had since the 3rd century applied to bishops and only in a secondary sense to presbyters  began in the 6th century to be used of presbyters  and is today
commonly used of presbyters  distinguishing them from bishops.today the term  priest  is used in roman catholicism  eastern orthodoxy  anglicanism  oriental orthodoxy  the church of the east  and some branches of lutheranism to refer to those who have been ordained to a ministerial position through receiving the sacrament of holy orders  although  presbyter  is also used. since the protestant reformation  non-sacramental denominations are more likely to use the term  elder  to refer to their pastors. the christian term  priest  does not have an entry in the anchor bible dictionary  but the dictionary does deal with the above-mentioned terms under the entry for  sheep  shepherd. .   ==== roman catholicism and eastern orthodoxy ====  the most significant liturgical acts reserved to priests in these traditions are the administration of the sacraments  including the celebration of the holy mass or divine liturgy (the terms for the celebration of the eucharist in the latin and byzantine traditions  respectively)  and the sacrament of reconciliation  also called confession. the sacraments of anointing of the sick (extreme unction) and confirmation are also administered by priests  though in the western tradition confirmation is ordinarily celebrated by a bishop. in the east  chrismation is performed by the priest (using oil specially consecrated by a bishop) immediately after baptism  and unction is normally performed by several priests (ideally seven)  but may be performed by one if necessary. in the west  holy baptism may be celebrated by anyone. the vatican catechism states that  according to latin tradition  the spouses as ministers of christ s grace mutually confer upon each other the sacrament of matrimony . thus marriage is a sacrament administered by the couple to themselves  but may be witnessed and blessed by a deacon  or priest (who usually administers the ceremony). in the east  holy baptism and marriage (which is called  crowning ) may be performed only by a priest. if a person is baptized in extremis (i.e.  when in fear of immediate death)  only the actual threefold immersion together with the scriptural words (matthew 28 19) may be performed by a layperson or deacon. the remainder of the rite  and chrismation  must still be performed by a priest  if the person survives. the only sacrament which may be celebrated only by a bishop is that of ordination (cheirotonia   laying-on of hands )  or holy orders. in these traditions  only men who meet certain requirements may become priests. in roman catholicism the canonical minimum age is twenty-five. bishops may dispense with this rule and ordain men up to one year younger. dispensations of more than a year are reserved to the holy see (can. 1031 §§1  4.) a catholic priest must be incardinated by his bishop or his major religious superior in order to engage in public ministry. in orthodoxy  the normal minimum age is
thirty (can. 9 of neocaesarea) but a bishop may dispense with this if needed. in neither tradition may priests marry after ordination. in the roman catholic church  priests in the latin rite  which covers the vast majority of roman catholicism  must be celibate except under special rules for married clergy converting from certain other christian confessions. married men may become priests in eastern orthodoxy and the eastern catholic churches  but in neither case may they marry after ordination  even if they become widowed. candidates for bishop are chosen only from among the celibate. orthodox priests will either wear a clerical collar similar to the above mentioned  or simply a very loose black robe that does not have a collar.   ==== anglican or episcopalian ====  the role of a priest in the anglican communion is largely the same as within the roman catholic church and eastern christianity  except that canon law in almost every anglican province restricts the administration of confirmation to the bishop  just as with ordination. whilst anglican priests who are members of religious orders must remain celibate (although there are exceptions  such as priests in the anglican order of cistercians)  the secular clergy—bishops  priests  and deacons who are not members of religious orders—are permitted to marry before or after ordination (although in most provinces they are not permitted to marry a person of the same sex.) the anglican churches  unlike the roman catholic or eastern christian traditions  have allowed the ordination of women as priests (referred to as  priests  not  priestesses ) in some provinces since 1971. this practice remains controversial  however  a minority of provinces (10 out of the 38 worldwide) retain an all-male priesthood. most continuing anglican churches do not ordain women to the priesthood. as anglicanism represents a broad range of theological opinion  its presbyterate includes priests who consider themselves no different in any respect from those of the roman catholic church  and a minority who prefer to use the title presbyter in order to distance themselves from the more sacrificial theological implications which they associate with the word priest. while priest is the official title of a member of the presbyterate in every anglican province worldwide (retained by the elizabethan settlement)  the ordination rite of certain provinces (including the church of england) recognizes the breadth of opinion by adopting the title the ordination of priests (also called presbyters). even though both words mean  elders   historically the term priest has been more associated with the  high church  or anglo-catholic wing  whereas the term  minister  has been more commonly used in  low church  or evangelical circles.   ==== lutheranism ====  the general priesthood or the priesthood of all believers  is a christian doctrine derived from several passages of the new testament. it is a foundational concept of protestantism. it is this doctrine that martin luther adduces in his 1520 to
the christian nobility of the german nation in order to dismiss the medieval christian belief that christians were to be divided into two classes   spiritual  and  temporal  or non-spiritual. the conservative reforms of lutherans are reflected in the theological and practical view of the ministry of the church. much of european lutheranism follows the traditional catholic governance of deacon  priest and bishop. the lutheran archbishops of finland  sweden  etc. and baltic countries are the historic national primates and some ancient cathedrals and parishes in the lutheran church were constructed many centuries before the reformation. indeed  ecumenical work within the anglican communion and among scandinavian lutherans mutually recognize the historic apostolic legitimacy and full communion. likewise in america  lutherans have embraced the apostolic succession of bishops in the full communion with episcopalians and most lutheran ordinations are performed by a bishop. in some lutheran churches  ordained clergy are called priests as in sweden and finland  while in others the term pastor is preferred.   ==== methodism ==== methodist clergy often have the title of pastor  minister  reverend  etc.   ==== latter day saints ====  in the latter day saint movement  the priesthood is the power and authority of god given to man  including the authority to perform ordinances and to act as a leader in the church. a body of priesthood holders is referred to as a quorum. priesthood denotes elements of both power and authority. the priesthood includes the power jesus gave his apostles to perform miracles such as the casting out of devils and the healing of sick (luke 9 1). latter day saints believe that the biblical miracles performed by prophets and apostles were performed by the power of the priesthood  including the miracles of jesus  who holds all of the keys of the priesthood. the priesthood is formally known as the  priesthood after the order of the son of god  but to avoid the too frequent use of the name of deity  the priesthood is referred to as the melchizedek priesthood (melchizedek being the high priest to whom abraham paid tithes). as an authority  the priesthood is the authority by which a bearer may perform ecclesiastical acts of service in the name of god. latter day saints believe that acts (and in particular  ordinances) performed by one with priesthood authority are recognized by god and are binding in heaven  on earth  and in the afterlife. there is some variation among the latter day saint denomination regarding who can be ordained to the priesthood. in the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints (lds church)  all worthy males above the age of 12 can be ordained to the priesthood. however  prior to a policy change in 1978  the lds church did not ordain men or boys who were of black african descent. the lds church does not ordain women to any of its priesthood offices. the reorganized church
of jesus christ of latter day saints (now the community of christ)  the second largest denomination of the movement  began ordaining women to all of its priesthood offices in 1984. this decision was one of the reasons that led to a schism in the church  which prompted the formation of the independent restoration branches movement from which other denominations have sprung  including the remnant church of jesus christ of latter day saints.   === islam ===  islam has no sacerdotal priesthood  as every believer (mu min) is individually empowered to engage with god directly  without any mediator. there are  however  a variety of academic and administrative offices which have evolved to assist muslims with this task  a full discussion can be found at clergy#islam.   == eastern religions ==   === hinduism === hindu priests historically were members of the brahmin caste. priests are ordained and trained as well. there are two types of hindu priests  pujaris (swamis  yogis  and gurus) and purohits (pundits). a pujari performs rituals in a temple. these rituals include bathing the murtis (the statues of the gods/goddesses)  performing puja  a ritualistic offering of various items to the gods  the waving of a ghee or oil lamp also called an offering in light  known in hinduism as aarti  before the murtis. pujaris are often married. a purohit  on the other hand  performs rituals and saṃskāras (sacraments) outside of the temple. there are special purohits who perform only funeral rites. in many cases  a purohit also functions as a pujari. both women and men are ordained as purohits and pujaris.   === zoroastrianism ===  in zoroastrianism  the priesthood is reserved for men and is a mostly hereditary position. the priests prepare a drink from a sacred plant  which is called the haoma ritual. they officiate the yasna  pouring libations into the sacred fire to the accompaniment of ritual chants.   === taoism === the taoist priests (道士  master of the dao  p. 488) act as interpreters of the principles of yin-yang  5 elements (fire  water  soil  wood  and metal p. 53) school of ancient chinese philosophy  as they relate to marriage  death  festival cycles  and so on. the taoist priest seeks to share the benefits of meditation with his or her community through public ritual and liturgy (p. 326). in the ancient priesthood before the tang  the priest was called jijiu ( libationer  p. 550)  with both male and female practitioners selected by merit. the system gradually changed into a male only hereditary taoist priesthood until more recent times (p. 550 551).   == indigenous and ethnic religions ==   === shintoism ===  the shinto priest is called a kannushi (神主  lit.  master of the kami )  originally pronounced kamunushi  sometimes referred to as a shinshoku (神職). a
kannushi is the person responsible for the maintenance of a shinto shrine  or jinja  purificatory rites  and for leading worship and veneration of a certain kami. additionally  priests are aided by miko (巫女   shrine maidens ) for many rites as a kind of shaman or medium. the maidens may either be family members in training  apprentices  or local volunteers. saiin were female relatives of the japanese emperor (termed saiō) who served as high priestesses in kamo shrine. saiō also served at ise shrine. saiin priestesses usually were elected from royalty. in principle  saiin remained unmarried  but there were exceptions. some saiin became consorts of the emperor  called nyōgo in japanese. the saiin order of priestesses existed throughout the heian and kamakura periods.   === africa === the yoruba people of western nigeria practice an indigenous religion with a chiefly hierarchy of priests and priestesses that dates to ad 800–1000. ifá priests and priestesses bear the titles babalawo for men and iyanifa for women.  priests and priestesses of the varied orisha are titled babalorisa for men and iyalorisa for women. initiates are also given an orisa or ifá name that signifies under which deity they are initiated. for example  a priestess of osun may be named osunyemi  and a priest of ifá may be named ifáyemi. this traditional  culture continues to this day as initiates from all around the world return to nigeria for initiation into the priesthood  and varied derivative sects in the new world (such as cuban santería and brazilian umbanda) use the same titles to refer to their officers as well.   === afro-latin american religions === in brazil  the priests in the umbanda  candomblé and quimbanda religions are called pai-de-santo (literally  father of saint  in english)  or  babalorixá  (a word borrowed from yoruba bàbálórìsà  meaning father of the orisha)  its female equivalent is the mãe-de-santo ( mother of saint )  also referred to as  ialorixá  (yoruba  iyálórìsà). in the cuban santería  a priest is called santero  or santera in its feminine equivalent.   == neo-paganism ==   === wicca ===  according to traditional wiccan beliefs  every member of the religion is considered a priestess or priest  as it is believed that no person can stand between another and the divine. however  in response to the growing number of wiccan temples and churches  several denominations of the religion have begun to develop a core group of ordained priestesses and priests serving a larger laity. this trend is far from widespread  but is gaining acceptance due to increased interest in the religion.   == dress ==  the dress of religious workers in ancient times may be demonstrated in frescoes and artifacts from the cultures. the dress is presumed to be related to the customary clothing of the culture  with some symbol of the deity worn on the
head or held by the person. sometimes special colors  materials  or patterns distinguish celebrants  as the white wool veil draped on the head of the vestal virgins. occasionally the celebrants at religious ceremonies shed all clothes in a symbolic gesture of purity. this was often the case in ancient times. an example of this is shown to the left on a kylix dating from c. 500 bc where a priestess is featured. modern religious groups tend to avoid such symbolism and some may be quite uncomfortable with the concept. the retention of long skirts and vestments among many ranks of contemporary priests when they officiate may be interpreted to express the ancient traditions of the cultures from which their religious practices arose. in most christian traditions  priests wear clerical clothing  a distinctive form of street dress. even within individual traditions it varies considerably in form  depending on the specific occasion. in western christianity  the stiff white clerical collar has become the nearly universal feature of priestly clerical clothing  worn either with a cassock or a clergy shirt. the collar may be either a full collar or a vestigial tab displayed through a square cutout in the shirt collar. eastern christian priests mostly retain the traditional dress of two layers of differently cut cassock  the rasson (greek) or podriasnik (russian) beneath the outer exorasson (greek) or riasa (russian). if a pectoral cross has been awarded it is usually worn with street clothes in the russian tradition  but not so often in the greek tradition. distinctive clerical clothing is less often worn in modern times than formerly  and in many cases it is rare for a priest to wear it when not acting in a pastoral capacity  especially in countries that view themselves as largely secular in nature. there are frequent exceptions to this however  and many priests rarely if ever go out in public without it  especially in countries where their religion makes up a clear majority of the population. pope john paul ii often instructed catholic priests and religious to always wear their distinctive (clerical) clothing  unless wearing it would result in persecution or grave verbal attacks. christian traditions that retain the title of priest also retain the tradition of special liturgical vestments worn only during services. vestments vary widely among the different christian traditions. in modern pagan religions  such as wicca  there is no one specific form of dress designated for the clergy. if there is  it is a particular of the denomination in question  and not a universal practice. however  there is a traditional form of dress  (usually a floor-length tunic and a knotted cord cincture  known as the cingulum)  which is often worn by worshipers during religious rites. among those traditions of wicca that do dictate a specific form of dress for its clergy  they usually wear the traditional tunic in addition to other articles of clothing (such as an open-fronted robe or a cloak)
as a distinctive form of religious dress  similar to a habit.   == assistant priest == in many religions there are one or more layers of assistant priests. in the ancient near east  hierodules served in temples as assistants to the priestess. in ancient judaism  the priests (kohanim) had a whole class of levites as their assistants in making the sacrifices  in singing psalms and in maintaining the temple. the priests and the levites were in turn served by servants called nethinim. these lowest level of servants were not priests. an assistant priest is a priest in the anglican and episcopal churches who is not the senior member of clergy of the parish to which they are appointed  but is nonetheless in priests  orders  there is no difference in function or theology  merely in  grade  or  rank . some assistant priests have a  sector ministry  that is to say that they specialize in a certain area of ministry within the local church  for example youth work  hospital work  or ministry to local light industry. they may also hold some diocesan appointment part-time. in most (though not all) cases an assistant priest has the legal status of assistant curate  although not all assistant curates are priests  as this legal status also applies to many deacons working as assistants in a parochial setting. the corresponding term in the catholic church is  parochial vicar  – an ordained priest assigned to assist the pastor (latin  parochus) of a parish in the pastoral care of parishioners. normally  all pastors are also ordained priests  occasionally an auxiliary bishop will be assigned that role. in wicca  the leader of a coven or temple (either a high priestess or high priest) often appoints an assistant. this assistant is often called a  deputy  but the more traditional terms  maiden  (when female and assisting a high priestess) and  summoner  (when male and assisting a high priest) are still used in many denominations.   == see also ==   == references ==   == external links == description of the problem of roman catholic and old catholic reunion with respect to the female priesthood chisholm  hugh  ed. (1911).  priest  . encyclopædia britannica (11th ed.). cambridge university press.  herbermann  charles  ed. (1913).  priest  . catholic encyclopedia. new york  robert appleton company.
clergy are formal leaders within established religions.  their roles and functions vary in different religious traditions  but usually involve presiding over specific rituals and teaching their religion s doctrines and practices. some of the terms used for individual clergy are clergyman  clergywoman  and churchman. less common terms are churchwoman and clergyperson   while cleric and clerk in holy orders both have a long history but are rarely used.  in christianity  the specific names and roles of the clergy vary by denomination and there is a wide range of formal and informal clergy positions  including deacons  elders  priests  bishops  preachers  pastors  ministers and the pope.  in islam  a religious leader is often known formally or informally as an imam  qadi  mufti  mullah  or ayatollah.  in the jewish tradition  a religious leader is often a rabbi (teacher) or hazzan (cantor).   == etymology == the word  cleric  comes from the ecclesiastical latin clericus  for those belonging to the priestly class. in turn  the source of the latin word is from the ecclesiastical greek klerikos (κληρικός)  meaning appertaining to an inheritance  in reference to the fact that the levitical priests of the old testament had no inheritance except the lord.  clergy  is from two old french words  clergié and clergie  which refer to those with learning and derive from medieval latin clericatus  from late latin clericus (the same word from which  cleric  is derived).  clerk  which used to mean one ordained to the ministry  also derives from clericus. in the middle ages  reading and writing were almost exclusively the domain of the priestly class  and this is the reason for the close relationship of these words. within christianity  especially in eastern christianity and formerly in western roman catholicism  the term cleric refers to any individual who has been ordained  including deacons  priests  and bishops. in latin roman catholicism  the tonsure was a prerequisite for receiving any of the minor orders or major orders before the tonsure  minor orders  and the subdiaconate were abolished following the second vatican council. now  the clerical state is tied to reception of the diaconate. minor orders are still given in the eastern catholic churches  and those who receive those orders are  minor clerics. the use of the word  cleric  is also appropriate for eastern orthodox minor clergy who are tonsured in order not to trivialize orders such as those of reader in the eastern church  or for those who are tonsured yet have no minor or major orders. it is in this sense that the word entered the arabic language  most commonly in lebanon from the french  as kleriki (or  alternatively  cleriki) meaning  seminarian.  this is all in keeping with eastern orthodox concepts of clergy  which still include
those who have not yet received  or do not plan to receive  the diaconate. a priesthood is a body of priests  shamans  or oracles who have special religious authority or function. the term priest is derived from the greek presbyter (πρεσβύτερος  presbýteros  elder or senior)  but is often used in the sense of sacerdos in particular  i.e.  for clergy performing ritual within the sphere of the sacred or numinous communicating with the gods on behalf of the community.   == buddhism ==  buddhist clergy are often collectively referred to as the sangha  and consist of various orders of male and female monks (originally called bhikshus and bhikshunis respectively). this diversity of monastic orders and styles was originally one community founded by gautama buddha during the 5th century bc living under a common set of rules (called the vinaya). according to scriptural records  these celibate monks and nuns in the time of the buddha lived an austere life of meditation  living as wandering beggars for nine months out of the year and remaining in retreat during the rainy season (although such a unified condition of pre-sectarian buddhism is questioned by some scholars). however  as buddhism spread geographically over time - encountering different cultures  responding to new social  political  and physical environments - this single form of buddhist monasticism diversified. the interaction between buddhism and tibetan bon led to a uniquely tibetan buddhism  within which various sects  based upon certain teacher-student lineages arose. similarly  the interaction between indian buddhist monks (particularly of the southern madhyamika school) and chinese confucian and taoist monks from c200-c900ad produced the distinctive ch an buddhism. ch an  like the tibetan style  further diversified into various sects based upon the transmission style of certain teachers (one of the most well known being the  rapid enlightenment  style of linji yixuan)  as well as in response to particular political developments such as the an lushan rebellion and the buddhist persecutions of emperor wuzong. in these ways  manual labour was introduced to a practice where monks originally survived on alms  layers of garments were added where originally a single thin robe sufficed  etc. this adaptation of form and roles of buddhist monastic practice continued after the transmission to japan. for example  monks took on administrative functions for the emperor in particular secular communities (registering births  marriages  deaths)  thereby creating buddhist  priests . again  in response to various historic attempts to suppress buddhism (most recently during the meiji era)  the practice of celibacy was relaxed and japanese monks allowed to marry. this form was then transmitted to korea  during later japanese occupation  where celibate and non-celibate monks today exist in the same sects. (similar patterns can also be observed in tibet during various historic periods multiple forms of monasticism have co-existed such as  ngagpa  lamas  and times at which celibacy was relaxed). as
these varied styles of buddhist monasticism are transmitted to western cultures  still more new forms are being created. in general  the mahayana schools of buddhism tend to be more culturally adaptive and innovative with forms  while theravada schools (the form generally practised in thailand  burma  cambodia and sri lanka) tend to take a much more conservative view of monastic life  and continue to observe precepts that forbid monks from touching women or working in certain secular roles. this broad difference in approach led to a major schism among buddhist monastics in about the 4th century bce  creating the early buddhist schools. while female monastic (bhikkhuni) lineages existed in most buddhist countries at one time  the theravada lineages of southeast asia died out during the 14th-15th century ad. as there is some debate about whether the bhikkhuni lineage (in the more expansive vinaya forms) was transmitted to tibet  the status and future of female buddhist clergy in this tradition is sometimes disputed by strict adherents to the theravadan style. some mahayana sects  notably in the united states (such as san francisco zen center) are working to reconstruct the female branches of what they consider a common  interwoven lineage.the diversity of buddhist traditions makes it difficult to generalize about buddhist clergy. in the united states  pure land priests of the japanese diaspora serve a role very similar to protestant ministers of the christian tradition. meanwhile  reclusive theravada forest monks in thailand live a life devoted to meditation and the practice of austerities in small communities in rural thailand- a very different life from even their city-dwelling counterparts  who may be involved primarily in teaching  the study of scripture  and the administration of the nationally organized (and government sponsored) sangha. in the zen traditions of china  korea and japan  manual labor is an important part of religious discipline  meanwhile  in the theravada tradition  prohibitions against monks working as laborers and farmers continue to be generally observed. currently in north america  there are both celibate and non-celibate clergy in a variety of buddhist traditions from around the world. in some cases they are forest dwelling monks of the theravada tradition and in other cases they are married clergy of a japanese zen lineage and may work a secular job in addition to their role in the buddhist community. there is also a growing realization that traditional training in ritual and meditation as well as philosophy may not be sufficient to meet the needs and expectations of american lay people. some communities have begun exploring the need for training in counseling skills as well. along these lines  at least two fully accredited master of divinity programs are currently available  one at naropa university in boulder  co and one at the university of the west in rosemead  ca. titles for buddhist clergy include   bhikkhu/bhikṣu and bhikkhuṇī/bhikṣuṇī sāmaṇera/śrāmaṇera and sāmaṇerī/śrāmaṇerī or śrāmaṇerikāin theravada   acharya ajahn anagarika ayya bhante dasa
sil mata luang por maechi or mae chee phra sayadaw sikkhamānā thilashinin mahayana   rōshi zen masterin vajrayana   ayya geshe guru karmapa lama dalai lama panchen lama rinpoche/rimpoche tertön tulku   == christianity ==  in general  christian clergy are ordained  that is  they are set apart for specific ministry in religious rites. others who have definite roles in worship but who are not ordained (e.g. laypeople acting as acolytes) are generally not considered clergy  even though they may require some sort of official approval to exercise these ministries. types of clerics are distinguished from offices  even when the latter are commonly or exclusively occupied by clerics. a roman catholic cardinal  for instance  is almost without exception a cleric  but a cardinal is not a type of cleric. an archbishop is not a distinct type of cleric  but is simply a bishop who occupies a particular position with special authority. conversely  a youth minister at a parish may or may not be a cleric. different churches have different systems of clergy  though churches with similar polity have similar systems.   === anglicanism ===  in anglicanism  clergy consist of the orders of deacons  priests (presbyters) and bishops in ascending order of seniority. canon  archdeacon  archbishop and the like are specific positions within these orders. bishops are typically overseers  presiding over a diocese composed of many parishes  with an archbishop presiding over a province  which is a group of dioceses. a parish (generally a single church) is looked after by one or more priests  although one priest may be responsible for several parishes. new clergy are ordained deacons. those seeking to become priests are usually ordained priest after a year. since the 1960s some anglican churches have reinstituted the diaconate as a permanent  rather than transitional  order of ministry focused on ministry that bridges the church and the world  especially ministry to those on the margins of society. for the forms of address for anglican clergy  see forms of address in the united kingdom. for a short period of history before the ordination of women as deacons  priests and bishops began within anglicanism they could be  deaconesses . although they were usually considered having a ministry distinct from deacons they often had similar ministerial responsibilities. in anglican churches all clergy are permitted to marry. in most national churches women may become deacons or priests  but while fifteen out of 38 national churches allow for the consecration of women as bishops  only five have ordained any. celebration of the eucharist is reserved for priests and bishops. national anglican churches are presided over by one or more primates or metropolitans (archbishops or presiding bishops). the senior archbishop of the anglican communion is the archbishop of canterbury  who acts as leader of the church of england and  first among equals  of the primates of all anglican churches. being a deacon 
priest or bishop is considered a function of the person and not a job. when priests retire they are still priests even if they no longer have any active ministry. however  they only hold the basic rank after retirement. thus a retired archbishop can only be considered a bishop (though it is possible to refer to  bishop john smith  the former archbishop of york )  a canon or archdeacon is a priest on retirement and does not hold any additional honorifics.   === catholicism ===  ordained clergy in the roman catholic church are either deacons  priests  or bishops belonging to the diaconate  the presbyterate  or the episcopate  respectively. among bishops  some are metropolitans  archbishops  or patriarchs. the pope is the bishop of rome  the supreme and universal hierarch of the church  and his authorization is now required for the ordination of all catholic bishops. with rare exceptions  cardinals are bishops  although it was not always so  formerly  some cardinals were people who had received clerical tonsure  but not holy orders. secular clergy are ministers  such as deacons and priests  who do not belong to a religious institute and live in the world at large  rather than a religious institute (saeculum). the holy see supports the activity of its clergy by the congregation for the clergy ([1])  a dicastery of roman curia. canon law indicates (canon 207) that  [b]y divine institution  there are among the christian faithful in the church sacred ministers who in law are also called clerics  the other members of the christian faithful are called lay persons . this distinction of a separate ministry was formed in the early times of christianity  one early source reflecting this distinction  with the three ranks or orders of bishop  priest and deacon  is the writings of saint ignatius of antioch. holy orders is one of the seven sacraments  enumerated at the council of trent  that the magisterium considers to be of divine institution. in the roman catholic church  only men are permitted to be clerics  although in antiquity women were ordained to the diaconate. in the latin church before 1972  tonsure admitted someone to the clerical state  after which he could receive the four minor orders (ostiary  lectorate  order of exorcists  order of acolytes) and then the major orders of subdiaconate  diaconate  presbyterate  and finally the episcopate  which according to roman catholic doctrine is  the fullness of holy orders . since 1972 the minor orders and the subdiaconate have been replaced by lay ministries and clerical tonsure no longer takes place  except in some traditionalist catholic groups  and the clerical state is acquired  even in those groups  by holy orders. in the latin church the initial level of the three ranks of holy orders is that of the diaconate. in addition to these
three orders of clerics  some eastern catholic  or  uniate  churches have what are called  minor clerics .members of institutes of consecrated life and societies of apostolic life are clerics only if they have received holy orders. thus  unordained monks  friars  nuns  and religious brothers and sisters are not part of the clergy. the code of canon law and the code of canons of the eastern churches prescribe that every cleric must be enrolled or  incardinated  in a diocese or its equivalent (an apostolic vicariate  territorial abbey  personal prelature  etc.) or in a religious institute  society of apostolic life or secular institute. the need for this requirement arose because of the trouble caused from the earliest years of the church by unattached or vagrant clergy subject to no ecclesiastical authority and often causing scandal wherever they went.current canon law prescribes that to be ordained a priest  an education is required of two years of philosophy and four of theology  including study of dogmatic and moral theology  the holy scriptures  and canon law have to be studied within a seminary or an ecclesiastical faculty at a university.roman catholicism mandates clerical celibacy for all clergy in the predominant latin rite  with the exception of deacons who do not intend to become priests. exceptions are sometimes admitted for ordination to transitional diaconate and priesthood on a case-by-case basis for married clergymen of other churches or communities who become catholics  but ordination of married men to the episcopacy is excluded (see personal ordinariate). clerical marriage is not allowed and therefore  if those for whom in some particular church celibacy is optional (such as permanent deacons in the latin church) wish to marry  they must do so before ordination. eastern catholic churches either follow the same rules as the latin church or require celibacy only for bishops. in the high middle ages  clergy in western europe had four privileges  right of canon  whoever committed real violence on the person of a cleric committed a sacrilege. this decree was issued in a lateran council of 1097 (requested by pope urban ii)  then renewed in the lateran council ii (1139) right of forum  by this right clergy could be judged by ecclesiastical tribunals only. emperor constantine i granted this right for bishops  which was subsequently extended to the rest of the clergy by imperial decree right of immunity  clergy could not be called for military service or other duties or charges incompatible with their role right of competence  a certain part of the income of clergy  necessary for sustenance  could not be sequestered by any action of creditors   === latter-day saints ===  the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints (lds church) has no dedicated clergy  and is governed instead by a system of lay priesthood leaders. locally  unpaid and part-time priesthood holders lead the church  the worldwide church is supervised
by full-time general authorities  some of whom receive modest living allowances. no formal theological training is required for any position. all leaders in the church are called by revelation and the laying on of hands by one who holds authority. jesus christ stands at the head of the church and leads the church through revelation given to the president of the church  the first presidency  and twelve apostles  all of whom are recognized as prophets  seers  and revelators and have lifetime tenure. below these men in the hierarchy are quorums of seventy  which are assigned geographically over the areas of the church. locally  the church is divided into stakes  each stake has a president  who is assisted by two counselors and a high council. the stake is made up of several individual congregations  which are called  wards  or  branches.  wards are led by a bishop and his counselors and branches by a president and his counselors. local leaders serve in their positions until released by their supervising authorities.generally  all worthy males age 12 and above receive the priesthood. youth age 12 to 18 are ordained to the aaronic priesthood as deacons  teachers  or priests  which authorizes them to perform certain ordinances and sacraments. adult males are ordained to the melchizedek priesthood  as elders  seventies  high priests  or patriarchs in that priesthood  which is concerned with spiritual leadership of the church. although the term  clergy  is not typically used in the lds church  it would most appropriately apply to local bishops and stake presidents. merely holding an office in the priesthood does not imply authority over other church members or agency to act on behalf of the entire church.   === orthodoxy ===  the orthodox church has three ranks of holy orders  bishop  priest  and deacon. these are the same offices identified in the new testament and found in the early church  as testified by the writings of the holy fathers. each of these ranks is ordained through the sacred mystery (sacrament) of the laying on of hands (called cheirotonia) by bishops. priests and deacons are ordained by their own diocesan bishop  while bishops are consecrated through the laying on of hands of at least three other bishops. within each of these three ranks there are found a number of titles. bishops may have the title of archbishop  metropolitan  and patriarch  all of which are considered honorifics. among the orthodox  all bishops are considered equal  though an individual may have a place of higher or lower honor  and each has his place within the order of precedence. priests (also called presbyters) may (or may not) have the title of archpriest  protopresbyter (also called  protopriest  or  protopope )  hieromonk (a monk who has been ordained to the priesthood) archimandrite (a senior hieromonk) and hegumen (abbot). deacons may have the
title of hierodeacon (a monk who has been ordained to the deaconate)  archdeacon or protodeacon. the lower clergy are not ordained through cheirotonia (laying on of hands) but through a blessing known as cheirothesia (setting-aside). these clerical ranks are subdeacon  reader and altar server (also known as taper-bearer). some churches have a separate service for the blessing of a cantor. ordination of a bishop  priest  deacon or subdeacon must be conferred during the divine liturgy (eucharist)—though in some churches it is permitted to ordain up through deacon during the liturgy of the presanctified gifts—and no more than a single individual can be ordained to the same rank in any one service. numerous members of the lower clergy may be ordained at the same service  and their blessing usually takes place during the little hours prior to liturgy  or may take place as a separate service. the blessing of readers and taper-bearers is usually combined into a single service. subdeacons are ordained during the little hours  but the ceremonies surrounding his blessing continue through the divine liturgy  specifically during the great entrance. bishops are usually drawn from the ranks of the archimandrites  and are required to be celibate  however  a non-monastic priest may be ordained to the episcopate if he no longer lives with his wife (following canon xii of the quinisext council of trullo) in contemporary usage such a non-monastic priest is usually tonsured to the monastic state  and then elevated to archimandrite  at some point prior to his consecration to the episcopacy. although not a formal or canonical prerequisite  at present bishops are often required to have earned a university degree  typically but not necessarily in theology. usual titles are your holiness for a patriarch (with your all-holiness reserved for the ecumenical patriarch of constantinople)  your beatitude for an archbishop/metropolitan overseeing an autocephalous church  your eminence for an archbishop/metropolitan generally  master or your grace for a bishop and father for priests  deacons and monks  although there are variations between the various orthodox churches. for instance  in churches associated with the greek tradition  while the ecumenical patriarch is addressed as  your all-holiness  all other patriarchs (and archbishops/metropolitans who oversee autocephalous churches) are addressed as  your beatitude. orthodox priests  deacons  and subdeacons must be either married or celibate (preferably monastic) prior to ordination  but may not marry after ordination.  remarriage of clergy following divorce or widowhood is forbidden. married clergy are considered as best-suited to staff parishes  as a priest with a family is thought better qualified to counsel his flock. it has been common practice in the russian tradition for unmarried  non-monastic clergy to occupy academic posts.   === protestantism ===  clergy in protestantism fill a wide variety of roles and functions. in many denominations  such as methodism  presbyterianism  and lutheranism  the roles of clergy are similar to roman catholic or anglican clergy  in
that they hold an ordained pastoral or priestly office  administer the sacraments  proclaim the word  lead a local church or parish  and so forth. the baptist tradition only recognizes two ordained positions in the church as being the elders (pastors) and deacons as outlined in the third chapter of i timothy[1tim 3]  in the bible. the presbyterian church (u.s.a.) ordains two types of presbyters or elders  teaching (pastor) and ruling (leaders of the congregation which form a council with the pastors). teaching elders are seminary trained and ordained as a presbyter and set aside on behalf of the whole denomination to the ministry of word and sacrament. ordinarily  teaching elders are installed by a presbytery as pastor of a congregation. ruling elders  after receiving training  may be commissioned by a presbytery to serve as a pastor of a congregation  as well as preach and administer sacraments.the process of being designated as a member of the protestant clergy  as well as that of being assigned to a particular office  varies with the denomination or faith group. some protestant denominations  such as methodism  presbyterianism  and lutheranism  are hierarchical in nature  and ordination and assignment to individual pastorates or other ministries are made by the parent denominations. in other traditions  such as the baptist and other congregational groups  local churches are free to hire (and often ordain) their own clergy  although the parent denominations typically maintain lists of suitable candidates seeking appointment to local church ministries and encourage local churches to consider these individuals when filling available positions. some protestant denominations require that candidates for ordination be  licensed  to the ministry for a period of time (typically one to three years) prior to being ordained. this period typically is spent performing the duties of ministry under the guidance  supervision  and evaluation of a more senior  ordained minister. in some denominations  however  licensure is a permanent  rather than a transitional state for ministers assigned to certain specialized ministries  such as music ministry or youth ministry. many protestant denominations reject the idea that the clergy are a separate category of people  but rather stress the priesthood of all believers. based on this theological approach  most protestants do not have a sacrament of ordination like the pre-reformation churches. protestant ordination  therefore  can be viewed more as a public statement by the ordaining body that an individual possesses the theological knowledge  moral fitness  and practical skills required for service in that faith group s ministry. some lutheran churches form an exception to this rule  as the lutheran book of concord allows ordination to be received as a sacrament. some protestant denominations dislike the word clergy and do not use it of their own leaders. often they refer to their leaders as pastors or ministers  titles that  if used  sometimes apply to the person only as long as he or she
holds a particular office.          == islam == islam  like judaism  has no clergy in the sacerdotal sense  there is no institution resembling the christian priesthood. islamic religious leaders  do not  serve as intermediaries between mankind and god  have  process of ordination  nor   sacramental functions . they have been said to resemble more rabbis  serving as  exemplars  teachers  judges  and community leaders  providing religious rules to the pious on  even the most minor and private  matters.the title mullah (a persian variation of the arabic maula   master )  commonly translated  cleric  in the west and thought to be analogous to  priest  or  rabbi  is a title of address for any educated or respected figure  not even necessarily (though frequently) religious. the title sheikh ( elder ) is used similarly. most of the religious titles associated with islam are scholastic or academic in nature  they recognize the holder s exemplary knowledge of the theory and practice of ad-dín (religion)  and do not confer any particular spiritual or sacerdotal authority. the most general such title is `alim (pl. `ulamah)  or  scholar . this word describes someone engaged in advanced study of the traditional islamic sciences (`ulum) at an islamic university or madrasah jami`ah. a scholar s opinions may be valuable to others because of his/her knowledge in religious matters  but such opinions should not generally be considered binding  infallible  or absolute  as the individual muslim is directly responsible to god for his or her own religious beliefs and practice.   === sunni ===  the nearest analogue among sunni muslims to the parish priest or pastor  or to the  pulpit rabbi  of a synagogue  is called the imam khatib. this compound title is merely a common combination of two elementary offices  leader (imam) of the congregational prayer  which in most mosques is performed at the times of all daily prayers  and preacher (khatib) of the sermon or khutba of the obligatory congregational prayer at midday every friday. although either duty can be performed by anyone who is regarded as qualified by the congregation  at most well-established mosques imam khatib is a permanent part-time or full-time position. he may be elected by the local community  or appointed by an outside authority – e. g.  the national government  or the waqf which sustains the mosque. there is no ordination as such  the only requirement for appointment as an imam khatib is recognition as someone of sufficient learning and virtue to perform both duties on a regular basis  and to instruct the congregation in the basics of islam. the title hafiz (lit.  preserver ) is awarded to one who has memorized the entire qur an  often by attending a special course for the purpose  the imam khatib of
a mosque is frequently (though not always) a hafiz. there are several specialist offices pertaining to the study and administration of islamic law or shari`ah. a scholar with a specialty in fiqh or jurisprudence is known as a faqih. a qadi is a judge in an islamic court. a mufti is a scholar who has completed an advanced course of study which qualifies him to issue judicial opinions or fatawah.   === shia ===  in modern shia islam  scholars play a more prominent role in the daily lives of muslims than in sunni islam  and there is a hierarchy of higher titles of scholastic authority  such as ayatollah. since around the mid-19th century  a more complex title has been used in twelver shi`ism  namely marjaʿ at-taqlid. marjaʿ (pl. marajiʿ) means  source  and taqlid refers to religious emulation or imitation. lay shi`ah must identify a specific marjaʿ whom they emulate  according to his legal opinions (fatawah) or other writings. on several occasions  the marjaʿiyyat (community of all marajiʿ) has been limited to a single individual  in which case his rulings have been applicable to all those living in the twelver shi ah world. of broader importance has been the role of the mujtahid  a cleric of superior knowledge who has the authority to perform ijtihad (independent judgment). mujtahids are few in number  but it is from their ranks that the marajiʿ at-taqlid are drawn.   === sufism ===  the spiritual guidance function known in many christian denominations as  pastoral care  is fulfilled for many muslims by a murshid ( guide )  a master of the spiritual sciences and disciplines known as tasawuf or sufism. sufi guides are commonly styled shaikh in both speaking and writing  in north africa they are sometimes called marabouts. they are traditionally appointed by their predecessors  in an unbroken teaching lineage reaching back to muhammad. (the lineal succession of guides bears a superficial similarity to christian ordination and apostolic succession  or to buddhist dharma transmission  but a sufi guide is regarded primarily as a specialized teacher and islam denies the existence of an earthly hierarchy among believers.) muslims who wish to learn sufism dedicate themselves to a murshid s guidance by taking an oath called a bai ah. the aspirant is then known as a murid ( disciple  or  follower ). a murid who takes on special disciplines under the guide s instruction  ranging from an intensive spiritual retreat to voluntary poverty and homelessness  is sometimes known as a dervish. during the islamic golden age  it was common for scholars to attain recognized mastery of both the  exterior sciences  (`ulum az-zahir) of the madrasahs as well as the  interior sciences  (`ulum al-batin) of sufism. al-ghazali and rumi are two notable examples.   === ahmadiyya === the highest office an ahmadi can hold is that of khalifatu l-masih. such a person may appoint amirs who manage regional
areas. the consultative body for ahmadiyya is called the majlis-i-shura  which ranks second in importance to the khalifatu l-masih. however  the ahmadiyya community is declared as non-muslims by many mainstream muslims and they reject the messianic claims of mirza ghulam ahmad.   == judaism ==  rabbinic judaism does not have clergy as such  although according to the torah there is a tribe of priests known as the kohanim who were leaders of the religion up to the destruction of the temple of jerusalem in 70 ad when most sadducees were wiped out  each member of the tribe  a kohen had priestly duties  many of which centered around the sacrificial duties  atonement and blessings of the israelite nation. today  jewish kohanim know their status by family tradition  and still offer the priestly blessing during certain services in the synagogue and perform the pidyon haben (redemption of the first-born son) ceremony. since the time of the destruction of the temple of jerusalem  the religious leaders of judaism have often been rabbis  who are technically scholars in jewish law empowered to act as judges in a rabbinical court. all types of judaism except orthodox judaism allow women as well as men to be ordained as rabbis and cantors.  the leadership of a jewish congregation is  in fact  in the hands of the laity  the president of a synagogue is its actual leader and any adult male jew (or adult jew in non-traditional congregations) can lead prayer services. the rabbi is not an occupation found in the torah  the first time this word is mentioned is in the mishnah. the modern form of the rabbi developed in the talmudic era. rabbis are given authority to make interpretations of jewish law and custom. traditionally  a man obtains one of three levels of semicha (rabbinic ordination) after the completion of an arduous learning program in torah  tanakh (hebrew bible)  mishnah and talmud  midrash  jewish ethics and lore  the codes of jewish law and responsa  theology and philosophy.  since the early medieval era an additional communal role  the hazzan (cantor) has existed as well. cantors have sometimes been the only functionaries of a synagogue  empowered to undertake religio-civil functions like witnessing marriages. cantors do provide leadership of actual services  primarily because of their training and expertise in the music and prayer rituals pertaining to them  rather than because of any spiritual or  sacramental  distinction between them and the laity. cantors as much as rabbis have been recognized by civil authorities in the united states as clergy for legal purposes  mostly for awarding education degrees and their ability to perform weddings  and certify births and deaths. additionally  jewish authorities license mohels  people specially trained by experts in jewish law and usually also by medical professionals to perform the ritual of circumcision.  traditional orthodox judaism does not license women as mohels  but other
types of judaism do. they are appropriately called mohelot (pl. of mohelet  f. of mohel) [2]. as the jewish news weekly of northern california states   ...there is no halachic prescription against female mohels  [but] none exist in the orthodox world  where the preference is that the task be undertaken by a jewish man. .in many places  mohels are also licensed by civil authorities  as circumcision is technically a surgical procedure. kohanim  who must avoid contact with dead human body parts (such as the removed foreskin) for ritual purity  cannot act as mohels  but some mohels are also either rabbis or cantors. another licensed cleric in judaism is the shochet  who are trained and licensed by religious authorities for kosher slaughter according to ritual law. a kohen may be a shochet. most shochetim are ordained rabbis.then there is the mashgiach. a mashgiach is someone who supervises the kashrut status of a kosher establishment. the mashgiach must know the torah laws of kashrut  and how they apply in the environment he is supervising. obviously  this can vary. in many instances  the mashgiach is a rabbi. this helps  since rabbinical students learn the laws of kosher as part of their syllabus. however  not every mashgiach is a rabbi  and not every rabbi is qualified to be a mashgiach.   === orthodox judaism === in contemporary orthodox judaism  women are forbidden from becoming rabbis or cantors. most orthodox rabbinical seminaries or yeshivas also require dedication of many years to education  but few require a formal degree from a civil education institution that often define christian clergy. training is often focused on jewish law  and some orthodox yeshivas forbid secular education. in hasidic judaism  generally understood as a branch of orthodox judaism  there are dynastic spiritual leaders known as rebbes  often translated in english as  grand rabbi . the office of rebbe is generally a hereditary one  but may also be passed from rebbe to student or by recognition of a congregation conferring a sort of coronation to their new rebbe. although one does not need to be an ordained rabbi to be a rebbe  most rebbes today are ordained rabbis. since one does not need to be an ordained rabbi to be a rebbe  at some points in history there were female rebbes as well  particularly the maiden of ludmir.   === conservative judaism === in conservative judaism  both men and women are ordained as rabbis and cantors. conservative judaism differs with orthodoxy in that it sees jewish law as binding but also as subject to many interpretations  including more liberal interpretations. academic requirements for becoming a rabbi are rigorous.  first earn a bachelor s degree before entering rabbinical school. studies are mandated in pastoral care and psychology  the historical development of judaism and most importantly the academic study of bible  talmud and rabbinic literature  philosophy and theology  liturgy
 jewish history  and hebrew literature of all periods.   === reconstructionist and reform judaism === reconstructionist judaism and reform judaism do not maintain the traditional requirements for study as rooted in jewish law and traditionalist text. both men and women may be rabbis or cantors. the rabbinical seminaries of these movements hold that one must first earn a bachelor s degree before entering the rabbinate. in addition studies are mandated in pastoral care and psychology  the historical development of judaism  and academic biblical criticism. emphasis is placed not on jewish law  but rather on sociology  modern jewish philosophy  theology and pastoral care.   == sikhism == sikh clergy consists of five jathedars  one each from five takhts or sacred seats. the jathedars are appointed by the shiromani gurdwara parbandhak committee (sgpc)  an elected body of the sikhs sometimes called the  parliament of sikhs.  the highest seat of the sikh religion is called akal takht and the jathedar of akal takht makes all the important decisions after consultations with the jathedars of the other four takhts and the sgpc.   == traditional religions ==  historically traditional (or pagan) religions typically combine religious authority and political power. what this means is that the sacred king or queen is therefore seen to combine both kingship and priesthood within his or her person  even though he or she is often aided by an actual high priest or priestess (see  for example  the maya priesthood). when the functions of political ruler and religious leader are combined in this way  deification could be seen to be the next logical stage of his or her social advancement within his or her native environment  as is found in the case of the egyptian pharaohs. the vedic priesthood of india is an early instance of a structured body of clergy organized as a separate and hereditary caste  one that occupied the highest social rung of its nation. a modern example of this phenomenon the priestly monarchs of the yoruba holy city of ile-ife in nigeria  whose reigning onis have performed ritual ceremonies for centuries for the sustenance of the entire planet and its people.   == health risks for ministry in the united states == in recent years  studies have suggested that american clergy in certain protestant  evangelical and jewish traditions are more at risk than the general population of obesity  hypertension and depression. their life expectancies have fallen in recent years and in the last decade their use of antidepressants has risen. several religious bodies in the united states (methodist  episcopal  baptist and lutheran) have implemented measures to address the issue  through wellness campaigns  for example - but also by simply ensuring that clergy take more time off. it is unclear whether similar symptoms affect american muslim clerics  although an anecdotal comment by one american imam suggested that leaders of mosques may also share these problems.one exception to the
findings of these studies is the case of american catholic priests  who are required by canon law to take a spiritual retreat each year  and four weeks of vacation. sociological studies at the university of chicago have confirmed this exception  the studies also took the results of several earlier studies into consideration and included roman catholic priests nationwide. it remains unclear whether american clergy in other religious traditions experience the same symptoms  or whether clergy outside the united states are similarly affected.   == see also == holy orders ordination   == references ==   == further reading ==   === clergy in general === aston  nigel. religion and revolution in france  1780-1804 (cua press  2000) bremer  francis j. shaping new englands  puritan clergymen in seventeenth-century england and new england (twayne  1994) dutt  sukumar. buddhist monks and monasteries of india (london  g. allen and unwin  1962) farriss  nancy marguerite. crown and clergy in colonial mexico  1759-1821  the crisis of ecclesiastical privilege (burns & oates  1968) ferguson  everett. the early church at work and worship  volume 1  ministry  ordination  covenant  and canon (casemate publishers  2014) freeze  gregory l. the parish clergy in nineteenth-century russia  crisis  reform  counter-reform (princeton university press  1983) haig  alan. the victorian clergy (routledge  1984)  in england holifield  e. brooks. god s ambassadors  a history of the christian clergy in america (wm. b. eerdmans publishing  2007)  a standard scholarly history lewis  bonnie sue. creating christian indians  native clergy in the presbyterian church (university of oklahoma press  2003) marshall  peter. the catholic priesthood and the english reformation (clarendon press  1994) osborne  kenan b. priesthood  a history of ordained ministry in the roman catholic church (paulist press  1989)  a standard scholarly history parry  ken  ed. the blackwell companion to eastern christianity (john wiley & sons  2010) sanneh  lamin.  the origins of clericalism in west african islam.  the journal of african history 17.01 (1976)  49-72. schwarzfuchs  simon. a concise history of the rabbinate (blackwell  1993)  a standard scholarly history zucker  david j. american rabbis  facts and fiction (jason aronson  1998)   === female clergy === amico  eleanor b.  ed.  reader s guide to women s studies ( fitzroy dearborn  1998)  pp 131–33  historiography collier-thomas  bettye. daughters of thunder  black women preachers and their sermons (1997). flowers  elizabeth h. into the pulpit  southern baptist women and power since world war ii (univ of north carolina press  2012) maloney  linda m.  women in ministry in the early church.  new theology review 16.2 (2013). online ruether  rosemary radford.  should women want women priests or women-church .  feminist theology 20.1 (2011)  63-72. tucker  ruth a.
and walter l. liefeld. daughters of the church  women and ministry from new testament times to the present (1987)  historical survey of female christian clergy   == external links ==  herbermann  charles  ed. (1913).  priesthood  . catholic encyclopedia. new york  robert appleton company.  church administration  - the church of jesus christ of latter day saints. wlsessays.net  scholarly articles on christian clergy from the wisconsin lutheran seminary library university of the west  buddhist m.div. naropa university  buddhist m.div.
a preacher is a person who delivers sermons or homilies on religious topics to an assembly of people. less common are preachers who preach on the street  or those whose message is not necessarily religious  but who preach components such as a moral or social worldview or philosophy.   == history == preachers are common throughout most cultures. they can take the form of a christian minister on a sunday morning  or an islamic imam. a muslim preacher in general is referred to as a dā‘ī  while one giving sermons on a friday afternoon is called a khatib.  the sermon or homily has been an important part of christian services since early christianity  and remains prominent in both roman catholicism and protestantism. lay preachers sometimes figure in these traditions of worship  for example the methodist local preachers  but in general preaching has usually been a function of the clergy. the dominican order is officially known as the order of preachers (ordo praedicatorum in latin)  friars of this order were trained to publicly preach in vernacular languages  and the order was created by saint dominic to preach to the cathars of southern france in the early thirteenth century. the franciscans are another important preaching order  travelling preachers  usually friars  were an important feature of late medieval catholicism. in most denominations  modern preaching is kept below about 40 minutes  but historic preachers of all denominations could at times speak for well over an hour  sometimes for two or three hours  and use techniques of rhetoric and theatre that are today somewhat out of fashion in mainline churches.    in many churches in the united states  the title  preacher  is synonymous with  pastor  or  minister  and the church s minister is often referred to simply as  our/the preacher  or by name such as  preacher smith . however  among some chinese churches  preacher (chinese  傳道) is different from pastor (chinese  牧師). a preacher in the protestant church is one of the younger clergy  but they are not officially recognised as pastors until they can prove their capability of leading the church.   == other uses == preacher is also the author of the book of ecclesiastes according to the king james version. preacher is one translation of the hebrew word קהלת (qoheleth). there is much debate about the identity of this preacher  many believe it is solomon.   == see also ==  media related to preachers at wikimedia commons child preacher list of christian preachers list of da is maggid preacher s kid prison minister   == notes ==   == references == francis  keith a.  gibson  william  et al.  the oxford handbook of the british sermon 1689-1901  2012 oup  isbn 0199583595  9780199583591  google books
a pastor is the leader of a christian congregation who also gives advice and counsel to people from the community or congregation. a pastor may be ordained or not (even a layperson may serve in this capacity). pastors are to act like shepherds by caring for the flock  and this care includes teaching. the new testament typically uses the words “bishops” (acts 20 28) and “elders” (1 peter 5 1) for this church position. likewise  peter instructs these particular servants to “act like shepherds” as they “oversee” the flock of god (1 pet. 5 2). the words “bishop” and “elder” are interchangeable in another passage as well (titus 1 5-6). these terms describe a leader (i.e.  bishop)  one who maintains a careful watch for the spiritual needs of all the members of the flock (i.e.  a pastor). he/she must meet scriptural qualifications (1 timothy 3 1-7  titus 1 5-9). whether called an elder  bishop  or pastor  these terms describe the same service in the church. in biblical days  only a man could be a pastor  but modern day often finds a woman filling the role. whether man or woman  this person is to be older and experienced in the faith (i.e.  an elder)  a person who is a decision-maker  and a manager of church affairs the actual word pastor is derived from a latin word meaning shepherd. when used as an ecclesiastical styling or title  the term may be abbreviated to  pr  or  ptr  (singular) or  ps  (plural).   == history == the word  pastor  derives from the latin noun pastor which means  shepherd  and is derived from the verb pascere –  to lead to pasture  set to grazing  cause to eat . the term  pastor  also relates to the role of elder within the new testament  and is synonymous with the biblical understanding of minister. the term pastor  shepherd and elder are all the same position.  the term “senior pastor” does not exist in scripture  but - in multi-staffed churches - is commonly used to denote the pastor who does the preaching. many protestant churches call their ministers  pastors . present-day usage of the word is rooted in the biblical metaphor of shepherding. the hebrew bible (or old testament) uses the hebrew word רעה‎ (roʿeh)  which is used as a noun as in  shepherd  and as a verb as in  to tend a flock.  it occurs 173 times in 144 old testament verses and relates to the literal feeding of sheep  as in genesis 29 7. in jeremiah 23 4  both meanings are used (ro im is used for  shepherds  and yir um for  shall feed them )   and i will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them  and they shall fear no more  nor be dismayed 
neither shall they be lacking  saith the lord.  (kjv).  english-language translations of the new testament usually render the greek noun ποιμήν (poimēn) as  shepherd  and the greek verb ποιμαίνω (poimainō) as  feed . the two words occur a total of 29 times in the new testament  most frequently referring to jesus.  for example  jesus called himself the  good shepherd  in john 10 11.  the same words in the familiar christmas story (luke 2) refer to literal shepherds. in five new testament passages though  the words relate to members of the church   john 21 16 - jesus told peter   feed my sheep  acts 20 17 - the apostle paul summons the elders of the church in ephesus to give a last discourse to them  in acts 20 28  he tells them that the holy spirit has made them overseers  and they are to feed the church of god. 1 corinthians 9 7 - paul says  of himself and the apostles   who feedeth a flock  and eateth not of the milk of the flock  ephesians 4 11 - paul wrote  and he gave some  apostles  and some  prophets  and some  evangelists  and some  pastors and teachers  1st peter 5 1-2 - peter tells the elders among his readers that they are to   feed the flock of god which is among you  taking the oversight thereof bishops of various denominations often bear a formal crosier in the form of a stylised shepherd s crook as a symbol of their pastoral/shepherding functions.   == historical usage == around 400 ad  saint augustine  a prominent african catholic bishop  described a pastor s job  disturbers are to be rebuked  the low-spirited to be encouraged  the infirm to be supported  objectors confuted  the treacherous guarded against  the unskilled taught  the lazy aroused  the contentious restrained  the haughty repressed  litigants pacified  the poor relieved  the oppressed liberated  the good approved  the evil borne with  and all are to be loved.   == current usage ==   === catholicism ===    in the united states  the term pastor is used by catholics for what in other english-speaking countries is called a parish priest. the latin term used in the code of canon law is parochus.  the parish priest is the proper clergyman in charge of the congregation of the parish entrusted to him. he exercises the pastoral care of the community entrusted to him under the authority of the diocesan bishop  whose ministry of christ he is called to share  so that for this community he may carry out the offices of teaching  sanctifying and ruling with the cooperation of other priests or deacons and with the assistance of lay members of christ s faithful
 in accordance with the law.   === lutheranism === in some lutheran churches (such as the evangelical lutheran church of finland)  ordained presbyters are called priests  while in others  such as the lutheran church–missouri synod  the term pastor is used more frequently.   === baptist ===  the term  pastor  in the majority of baptist churches  is one of two offices within the church  deacon being the other  and is considered synonymous with  elder  or  bishop  (though in reformed baptist churches  elders are a separate office).in larger churches with many staff members   senior pastor  commonly refers to the person who gives the sermons the majority of the time  with other persons having titles relating to their duties  for example  worship pastor  for the person leading singing.   === anglicanism === ordained presbyters are called priests in the church of england  as in all other ecclesiastical provinces of the anglican communion  and use the title reverend if they are low church and father or sister if they are high church. those presbyters who are not ordained but have a licence from their bishop are increasingly using the title pastor  as well as those office holders who are communicants within the anglican communion and participate in lay ministry where a licence is not required.   === methodism ===  united methodists ordain to the office of deacon and elder  each of whom can use the title of pastor depending. united methodists also use the title of pastor for non-ordained clergy who are licensed and appointed to serve a congregation as their pastor or associate pastor  often referred to as licensed local pastors. these pastors may be lay people  seminary students  or seminary graduates in the ordination process  and cannot exercise any functions of clergy outside the charge where they are appointed.   === reformed === the use of the term pastor to refer to the common protestant title of modern times dates to the days of john calvin and huldrych zwingli. both men  and other reformers  seem to have revived the term to replace the roman catholic priest in the minds of their followers. the pastor was considered to have a role separate from the board of presbyters.   === restorationist === some groups today view the pastor  bishop  and elder as synonymous terms or offices  many who do are descended from the restoration movement in america during the 19th century  such as the disciples of christ and the churches of christ.   == other religions == other religions have started to use the term pastor for their own ordained leader of congregation such as  buddhist pastor .   == see also ==   == notes ==   == references == bercot  david w. (1999). will the real heretics please stand up. scroll publishing. isbn 0-924722-00-2.
dowly  tim (ed.) (1977). the history of christianity. lion publishing. isbn 0-7459-1625-2.cs1 maint  extra text  authors list (link)   == external links == newadvent.org  the catholic encyclopedia s entry on the term pastor. lifeway.com  articles to help the pastor in the roles of preacher  missionary  leader  shepherd  and person. nacministers.com  priesthood of all believers  explained and supported in scripture
an investor is a person that allocates capital with the expectation of a future financial return. types of investments include  equity  debt securities  real estate  currency  commodity  token  derivatives such as put and call options  futures  forwards  etc. this definition makes no distinction between the investors in the primary and secondary markets.  that is  someone who provides a business with capital and someone who buys a stock are both investors.  an investor who owns a stock is a shareholder.   == essential quality == the assumption of risk in anticipation of gain but recognizing a higher than average possibility of loss. the term  speculation  implies that a business or investment risk can be analyzed and measured  and its distinction from the term  investment  is one of degree of risk. it differs from gambling  which is based on random outcomes.investors can include stock traders but with this distinguishing characteristic  investors are owners of a company which entails responsibilities.   == types of investors == there are two types of investors  retail investors and institutional investors    === retail investor === individuals gambling in games of chance. individual investors (including trusts on behalf of individuals  and umbrella companies formed by two or more to pool investment funds) collectors of art  antiques  and other things of value angel investors (individuals and groups) sweat equity investor   === institutional investor === venture capital and private equity funds  which serve as investment collectives on behalf of individuals  companies  pension plans  insurance reserves  or other funds. businesses that make investments  either directly or via a captive fund investment trusts  including real estate investment trusts mutual funds  hedge funds  and other funds  ownership of which may or may not be publicly traded (these funds typically pool money raised from their owner-subscribers to invest in securities) sovereign wealth fundsinvestors might also be classified according to their styles. in this respect  an important distinctive investor psychology trait is risk attitude.   == investor protection == the term  investor protection  defines the entity  of efforts  and activities to observe  safeguard and enforce the rights and claims of a person in his role as an investor. this includes advice and legal action.  the assumption of a need of protection is based on the experience that financial investors  are usually structurally inferior to providers of financial services and products due to lack of professional knowledge  information or experience. countries with stronger investor protections tend to grow faster than those with poor investor protections.  investor protection includes accurate financial reporting by public companies so the investors can make an informed decision.  investor protection also includes fairness of the market which means all participants in the market have access to the same information.   === through government === investor protection through government involve regulations
and enforcement by government agencies to ensure that market is fair and fraudulent activities are eliminated.  an example of a government agency that provides protection to investors is the u.s. securities and exchange commission (sec)  which works to protect reasonable investors in america.   === as individuals === investor protection through individual is the strategy that one utilizes to minimize loss. individual investors can protect themselves by purchasing only shares of businesses that they understand  or only those that remain calm through market volatility. an individual investor may be protected by the strategy he uses in investment. the strategy includes an appropriate price of the stocks or assets in the right time he enters. it s hard to fix what  an appropriate price  is  and when it is appropriate because no one makes a purchase or a sale absolutely in his most favorable situation. however  determination may be made when the price of such share or assets are  undervalued  comparing to its potentiality. this is called the margin of safety  where an investor can feel at ease when the price of the stocks is alarmingly down.   == investment tax structures == while a tax structure may change  it is generally accepted that long-term capital gains will maintain their position of providing an advantage to investors. this is countered by the opinion that after-tax returns should be considered  especially during retirement  on the basis that allocation to equities is in general  lower  than any returns and should be maximized  to the most lucrative extent. in the current circumstances  long-term capital gains offer one of the best opportunities in the united states tax structure. it is made easier for investors to generate long-term capital gains by the employment of exchange-traded funds (etfs)  the process of investment in broad-based index funds  without required indicators. although some outlandish etfs could provide investors with the opportunity to venture into previously inaccessible markets and employ different strategies  the unpredictable nature of these holdings frequently result in short-term transactions   surprising tax equations and general performance results issues. company dividends are paid from after-tax profits  with the tax already deducted. therefore  shareholders are given some respite with a preferential tax rate of 15% on  qualified dividends  in the event of the company being domiciled in the united states. alternatively  in another country having a double-taxation treaty with the usa  accepted by the irs . non-qualified dividends paid by other foreign companies or entities  for example  those receiving income derived from interest on bonds held by a mutual fund  are taxed at the regular and generally higher rate of income tax. when applied to 2013  this is on a sliding scale up to 39.6%  with an additional 3.8% surtax for high-income taxpayers ($200 000 for singles  $250 000 for married couples).   == discipline == a disciplined and structured investment plan prevents emotional
investing which can be related to impulsive buying. this factor can be utilized to counteract the sentiments of a marketplace  which is often reflective of the emotional state of an entire population. short-term activity in stock prices or the broader markets can frequently be compared to impulsive actions. this is seen in the term  bull run  which can induce investors to leap into an investment  as opposed to a  bearish market  that could influence a  sell-off .  it is these types of market scenarios that can cause investors to abandon their investment strategies. investor discipline is the ability to maintain an investment strategy even in the most tempting  or extreme conditions in the marketplace. an established and popular method for stock market investors is systematic investment plans (sips) especially for those who have a regular  monthly surplus income. the provision for reaping maximum benefits from these plans is that a disciplined strategy is maintained  one of the foremost advantages for a successful investor. consistency is closely associated with an investment strategy and can be related to various  adopted  proven techniques  for example  predicting outperforming funds  valuation  or a technical strategy. a strategic advantage that meets the required consistency is long-term investment  which in turn  offers investors long-term capital gains tax advantages.  while many investors try to exercise a long-term disciplined approach  the investment marketplace can provide various  tempting options  for instance  a sudden drop in the marketplace  or a pending worldwide event. this is particularly prevalent for retired investors  who are preserving their capital with care.   == constant advantage for retirees == in general  core indexes remain constant making it unnecessary for investors to move from one to another. although an investor could transfer holdings  despite a maturation of the companies and their markets  a large-cap exchange-traded fund would never require being switched for a similar holding. a large-cap etf will always remain so and an investor will usually want to retain at least a part allocation to large-cap equities in their portfolio. it is consistency that is a significant advantage for etf investors and one that makes it convenient to retain investment positions and benefit from long-term capital gains tax. despite a potential reduction in the capital gains tax advantage  it is an advantage that should continue to provide some positive benefits in producing after-tax returns. this is a factor that could become an important issue in the future as taxes increase  affecting the lifestyles of retirees. it can be added to by additional taxes generated in short-term trading  exacerbating the situation  due to normal income-tax rates increases.   == role of the financier ==  a financier () is a person  whose primary occupation is either facilitating or directly providing investments to up-and-coming or established companies and businesses  typically involving large sums of money and usually involving private equity and venture capital
 mergers and acquisitions  leveraged buyouts  corporate finance  investment banking  or large-scale asset management. a financier makes money through this process when his or her investment is paid back with interest  from part of the company s equity awarded to them as specified by the business deal  or a financier can generate income through commission  performance  and management fees. a financier can also promote the success of a financed business by allowing the business to take advantage of the financier s reputation. the more experienced and capable the financier is  the more the financier will be able to contribute to the success of the financed entity  and the greater reward the financier will reap. the term  financier  is french  and derives from finance or payment.  financier is someone who handles money. certain financier avenues require degrees and licenses including venture capitalists  hedge fund managers  trust fund managers  accountants  stockbrokers  financial advisors  or even public treasurers. personal investing on the other hand  has no requirements and is open to all by means of the stock market or by word of mouth requests for money. a financier  will be a specialized financial intermediary in the sense that it has experience in liquidating the type of firm it is lending to .   === perceptions === economist edmund phelps has argued that the financier plays a role in directing capital to investments that governments and social organizations are constrained from playing   [t]he pluralism of experience that the financiers bring to bear in their decisions gives a wide range of entrepreneurial ideas a chance of insightful evaluation. and  importantly  the financier and the entrepreneur do not need the approval of the state or of social partners. nor are they accountable later on to such social bodies if the project goes badly  not even to the financier s investors. so projects can be undertaken that would be too opaque and uncertain for the state or social partners to endorse. the concept of the financier has been distinguished from that of a mere capitalist based on the asserted higher level of judgment required of the financier. however  financiers have also been mocked for their perceived tendency to generate wealth at the expense of others  and without engaging in tangible labor. for example  humorist george helgesen fitch described the financier as  a man who can make two dollars grow for himself where one grew for some one else before .   == guidelines of specific investors == specific investment practices are suggested to maintain an ethical behavior based on principles universally accepted..   == socially responsible investing == socially responsible investing is recommended in all types of investment.   == see also ==   == further reading == matthew josephson  the money lords  the great finance capitalists  1925–1950  new york  weybright and talley  1972.   ==
references ==
an illustrator is an artist who specializes in enhancing writing or elucidating concepts by providing a visual representation that corresponds to the content of the associated text or idea. the illustration may be intended to clarify complicated concepts or objects that are difficult to describe textually  which is the reason illustrations are often found in children s books.illustration is the art of making images that work with something and add to it without needing direct attention and without distracting from what they illustrate. the other thing is the focus of the attention  and the illustration s role is to add personality and character without competing with that other thing.illustrations have been used in advertisements  architectural rendering  greeting cards  posters  books  graphic novels  storyboards  business  technical communications  magazines  shirts  video games  tutorials  and newspapers. a cartoon illustration can add humor to stories or essays.   == techniques ==  use reference images to create scenes and characters. this can be as simple as looking at an image to inspire your artwork  or creating character sketches and detailed scenes from different angles to create the basis of a picture book world. some traditional illustration techniques include watercolor  pen and ink  airbrush art  oil painting  pastels  wood engraving  and linoleum cuts.  john held  jr. was an illustrator who worked in a variety of styles and media  including linoleum cuts  pen and ink drawings  magazine cover paintings  cartoons  comic strips  and set design  while also creating fine art with his animal sculptures and watercolor  many established illustrators attended an art school or college of some sort and were trained in different painting and drawing techniques. traditional illustration seems to have made a resurgence in the age of social media thanks to social networks like instagram  facebook  pinterest  and youtube. currently traditional and digital illustration are both flourishing. universities and art schools offer specific courses in illustration (for example in the uk  a ba (hons) degree) so this has become a new avenue into the profession. many illustrators are freelance  commissioned by publishers (of newspapers  books  or magazines) or advertising agencies. most scientific illustrations and technical illustrations are also known as information graphics. among the information graphics specialists are medical illustrators who illustrate human anatomy  often requiring many years of artistic and medical training. a particularly popular medium with illustrators of the 1950s and 1960s was casein  as was egg tempera. the immediacy and durability of these media suited illustration s demands well. the artwork in both types of paint withstood the rigors of travel to clients and printers without damage. computer illustration  or digital illustration  is the use of digital tools to produce images under the direct manipulation of the artist  usually through a pointing device  such as a tablet or a mouse. computers dramatically changed the industry and today
 many cartoonists and illustrators create digital illustrations using computers  graphics tablets  and scanners. software such as adobe illustrator  adobe photoshop  corel painter  and affinity designer are now widely used by those professionals.   == see also ==  airbrush artist archaeological illustration architectural illustrator cartoonist fashion illustration graphic designer marker rendering painters pictorial maps storyboard artist stuttgart database of scientific illustrators visualizer   == references ==   == external links == societies and organizationsdirectory of illustration illustratörcentrum society of illustrators american illustration communication arts society of children’s book writers and illustrators san francisco society of illustrators society of illustrators of los angeles the association of illustrators the illustrators partnership of america aiiq – l’association des illustrateurs et illustratrices du québec colorado alliance of illustrators the association archaeological illustrators and surveyors guild of natural science illustrators the association of medical illustrators guild of natural science illustrators-northwest illustrators australia french illustrators urban sketchers official website
a cartoonist (also comic strip creator  comic book artist  graphic novel artist  or comic book illustrator) is a visual artist who specializes in drawing cartoons (individual images) and/or comics (sequential images). the term may refer to artists who handle all aspects of the work – including writing the material – or to those who contribute only part of the production. cartoonists may work in many formats  such as booklets  comic strips  comic books  editorial cartoons  graphic novels  manuals  gag cartoons  illustrations  storyboards  posters  shirts  books  advertisements  greeting cards  magazines  newspapers  and video game packaging.   == history ==   === in the west === the english satire/satirist and editorial cartoonist william hogarth  who emerged in the 18th century  has been credited with pioneering western sequential art. his work ranged from realistic portraiture to comic strip-like series of pictures called  modern moral subjects . much of his work poked fun at contemporary politics and customs  illustrations in such style are often referred to as  hogarthian . following the work of hogarth  political cartoons began to develop in england in the latter part of the 18th century under the direction of its great exponents  james gillray and thomas rowlandson  both from london. gillray explored the use of the medium for lampooning and caricature  calling the king (george iii)  prime ministers and generals to account  and has been referred to as the father of the political cartoon.while never a professional cartoonist  benjamin franklin is credited with having the first cartoon published in an american newspaper.  in the 19th century  professional cartoonists such as thomas nast introduced other familiar american political symbols  such as the republican elephant.  during the 20th century  numerous magazines carried single-panel gag cartoons by such freelance cartoonists as charles addams  irwin caplan  chon day  clyde lamb  and john norment. these were almost always published in black and white  although collier s often carried cartoons in color. the debut of playboy introduced full-page color cartoons by jack cole  eldon dedini  roy raymonde and others. single-panel cartoonists syndicated to newspapers included dave breger  hank ketcham  george lichty  fred neher  irving phillips  and j. r. williams.   == comic strips == comic strips received widespread distribution to mainstream newspapers by syndicates such as the universal press syndicate  united media  or king features. sunday strips go to a coloring company such as american color before they are published. some comic strip creators publish in the alternative press or on the internet. both vintage and current strips receive reprints in book collections. calum mackenzie  in his preface to the exhibition catalog  the scottish cartoonists (glasgow print studio gallery  1979) defined the selection criteria    the difference between a cartoonist and an illustrator was the same as the difference
between a comedian and a comedy actor—the former both deliver their own lines and take full responsibility for them  the latter could always hide behind the fact that it was not his entire creation.within the comic strip format  it is typical for one creator to produce the whole strip. however  it is also not uncommon for the writing of the strip and the drawing of the art to be carried out by two different people  a writer and an artist (with or without additional assistant artists). in some cases  one artist might draw key figures while another does only backgrounds.   many strips were the work of two people although only one signature was displayed. shortly after frank willard began moon mullins in 1923  he hired ferd johnson as his assistant. for decades  johnson received no credit. willard and johnson traveled about florida  maine  los angeles and mexico  drawing the strip while living in hotels  apartments and farmhouses. at its peak of popularity during the 1940s and 1950s  the strip ran in 350 newspapers. according to johnson  he had been doing the strip solo for at least a decade before willard s death in 1958   they put my name on it then. i had been doing it about 10 years before that because willard had heart attacks and strokes and all that stuff. the minute my name went on that thing and his name went off  25 papers dropped the strip. that shows you that  although i had been doing it ten years  the name means a lot.    == comic books ==  there are many books of cartoons in both paperback and hardcover  such as the collections of cartoons from the new yorker. prior to the 1960s  cartoons were mostly ignored by museums and art galleries. in 1968  the cartoonist and comedian roger price opened the first new york city gallery devoted exclusively to cartoons  mainly work by the leading magazine gag cartoonists. today  there are several museums devoted to cartoons  notably the billy ireland cartoon library & museum  run by curator jenny e. robb at ohio state university. with regards to the comic book format  the work can be split in many different ways.  the writing and the creation of the art can be split between two people  an example being from hell  which was written by alan moore and drawn by eddie campbell.  the writing of a comic book story can sometimes be shared between two people  with one person writing the plot and another the script. the artistic work is often subdivided  especially on work produced for the larger comic book publishers  with four people typically working on the art  a penciller  an inker  a colorist  and a letterer. sometimes this combination of four artists is augmented by a fifth  a breakdown artist. however  this
generally occurs only when an artist fails to meet a deadline or when a writer  sometimes referred to as a scripter  produces breakdown art. breakdown art is where the story has been laid out very roughly in pencils to indicate panel layouts and character positions within panels but with no details. such roughs are sometimes referred to as  layouts.  the norm of four artists is sometimes reduced to three if the penciller also inks his own work  usually being credited within the book as a penciller/inker. john byrne and walt simonson are artists who have  on occasion  inked their own work. that these roles are highly interchangeable  and many artists can fulfill different roles. stan sakai is a highly regarded letterer of comic books who also creates his own series  usagi yojimbo. producing his autobiographical works  eddie campbell has created both scripts and art  plus teaming with his daughter on the coloring. on cerebus  for the majority of the run  dave sim created everything except the backgrounds  which were drawn by gerhard.   == web cartoonist == many artists have used the web since its inception to publish their works online. this eventually led to the creation of webcomics thanks in part to many titles being able to be read for free and anyone being able to publish them. many of the artists who create these webcomics are known as web cartoonists due to the fact that the vast majority of webcomics are considered to be online versions of comic-strips and cartoons rather than full-fledged comic books like digital comics. it is hard to pinpoint when the actual term was created but the earliest use was 2001 with the web cartoonists  choice awards. some well known web cartoonists include randall munroe of xkcd  jeph jacques of questionable content and jerry holkins and mike krahulik of penny arcade.   == creation == comics artists usually sketch a drawing in pencil before going over the drawing in india ink  using either a dip pen or a brush. artists may also use a lightbox to create the final image in ink. some artists  brian bolland  for example  use computer graphics  with the published work as the first physical appearance of the artwork. by many definitions (including mccloud s  above)  the definition of comics extends to digital media such as webcomics and the mobile comic. the nature of the comics work being created determines the number of people who work on its creation  with successful comic strips and comic books being produced through a studio system  in which an artist assembles a team of assistants to help create the work. however  works from independent companies  self-publishers  or those of a more personal nature can be produced by a single creator. within the comic book industry of north america  the studio system has come to be the main method of creation. through its use by the
industry  the roles have become heavily codified  and the managing of the studio has become the company s responsibility  with an editor discharging the management duties. the editor assembles a number of creators and oversees the work to publication. any number of people can assist in the creation of a comic book in this way  from a plotter  a breakdown artist  a penciller  an inker  a scripter  a letterer  and a colorist  with some roles being performed by the same person. in contrast  a comic strip tends to be the work of a sole creator  usually termed a cartoonist. however  it is not unusual for a cartoonist to employ the studio method  particularly when a strip become successful. mort walker employed a studio  while bill watterson and charles schulz did not. gag  political  and editorial cartoonists tend to work alone as well  though a cartoonist may use assistants.   === tools === artists use a variety of pencils  paint brushes  or paper  typically bristol board  and a waterproof ink. when inking  many artists preferred to use a winsor & newton series 7  #3 brush as the main tool  which could be used in conjunction with other brushes  dip pens  a fountain pen  and/or a variety of technical pens or markers. mechanical tints can be employed to add grey tone to an image. an artist might paint with acrylics  gouache  poster paints  or watercolors. color can also be achieved through crayons  pastels or colored pencils. eraser  rulers  templates  set squares and a t-square assist in creating lines and shapes. a drawing table provides an angled work surface with lamps sometimes attached to the table. a light box allows an artist to trace his pencil work when inking  allowing for a looser finish. knives and scalpels fill a variety of needs  including cutting board or scraping off mistakes. a cutting mat aids paper trimming. process white is a thick opaque white material for covering mistakes. adhesives and tapes help composite an image from different sources.   == see also ==   == references ==   === works cited ===   == further reading == steve edgell  tim pilcher  brad brooks  the complete cartooning course  principles  practices  techniques (london  barron s  2001).   == external links == comic creators at curlie   === societies and organizations === professional cartoonists  organisation (uk) national cartoonists society association of american editorial cartoonists society of illustrators society of children’s book writers and illustrators society of illustrators of los angeles the association of illustrators the illustrators partnership of america aiiq - l’association des illustrateurs et illustratrices du québec colorado alliance of illustrators institute for archaeologists graphics archaeology group guild of natural science illustrators guild of natural science illustrators-northwest illustrators australia [bit.ly/2xw7qie] australian cartoonists association 2xw7qie 
 === communities === cartoonist club deviantart conceptart toonsup mojizu illustrateur comic design steamkat
a receptionist is an employee taking an office or administrative support position. the work is usually performed in a waiting area such as a lobby or front office desk of an organization or business. the title receptionist is attributed to the person who is employed by an organization to receive or greet any visitors  patients  or clients and answer telephone calls. the term front desk is used in many hotels for an administrative department where a receptionist s duties also may include room reservations and assignment  guest registration  cashier work  credit checks  key control as well as mail and message service. such receptionists are often called front desk clerks. receptionists cover many areas of work to assist the businesses they work for  including setting appointments  filing  record keeping  and other office tasks.   == responsibilities ==  the business duties of a receptionist may include answering visitors  enquiries about a company and its products or services  directing visitors to their destinations  sorting and handing out mail  answering incoming calls on multi-line telephones or  earlier in the 20th century  a switchboard  setting appointments  filing  records keeping  keyboarding/data entry and performing a variety of other office tasks  such as faxing or emailing. some receptionists may also perform bookkeeping or cashiering duties. some  but not all  offices may expect the receptionist to serve coffee or tea to guests  and to keep the lobby area tidy.a receptionist may also assume some security guard access control functions for an organization by verifying employee identification  issuing visitor passes  and observing and reporting any unusual or suspicious persons or activities.  a receptionist is often the first business contact a person will meet at any organization. it is an expectation of most organizations that the receptionist maintains a calm  courteous and professional demeanor at all times  regardless of the visitor s behavior. some personal qualities that a receptionist is expected to possess in order to do the job successfully include attentiveness  a well-groomed appearance  initiative  loyalty  maturity  respect for confidentiality and discretion  a positive attitude and dependability. at times  the job may be stressful due to interaction with many different people with different types of personalities  and being expected to perform multiple tasks quickly.   == opportunities for advancement ==  depending on the industry a receptionist position can have opportunities for networking in order to advance to other positions within a specific field. some people may use this type of job as a way to familiarize themselves with office work  or to learn of other functions or positions within a corporation. some people use receptionist work as a way to earn money while pursuing further educational opportunities or other career interests such as in the performing arts or as writers. while many persons working as receptionists continue in that position throughout their careers  some receptionists may advance to
other administrative jobs  such as a customer service representative  dispatcher  interviewers  secretary  production assistant  personal assistant  or executive assistant. in smaller businesses  such as a doctor s or a lawyer s office  a receptionist may also be the office manager who is charged with a diversity of middle management level business operations. for example  in the hotel industry  the night-time receptionist s role is almost always combined with performing daily account consolidation and reporting  more particularly known as night auditing. when receptionists leave the job  they often enter other career fields such as sales and marketing  public relations or other media occupations. a few famous people were receptionists in the beginning  such as betty williams  a co-recipient of the 1976 nobel peace prize. a number of celebrities had worked as receptionists before they became famous  such as singer/songwriter naomi judd and the late linda mccartney  photographer  entrepreneur and wife of beatle paul mccartney. other famous people who began their careers as receptionists or worked in the field include civil rights activist rosa parks and former hewlett-packard ceo carly fiorina.   == evolution and new technology == some small-to-medium-sized business owners hire a live remote receptionist in lieu of a full-time  in-house receptionist  thanks to advances in communications technology. as the phrase itself suggests  a live remote receptionist deals with phone calls for a company in another location using telephony private branch exchange (pbx) servers. most modern receptionist services can take messages  screen and forward calls  answer basic faqs  and fill out web forms. many services can also schedule appointments and take credit card orders. some of the older receptionist services have been around for decades  but these often operate very differently from modern services.advances in touch screen and 2-way video technology is changing the way some receptionist work. new types of virtual video receptionist systems now allows for live  in-house or remote receptionists to manage office lobby areas from remote locations. these virtual receptionists not only answer phones but also greet walk-in visitors by utilizing a motion detection camera to  see  visitors as they enter the building. the remote receptionist is then displayed in a video window on a wall mounted lcd  kiosk or desktop all-in-one computer. the video receptionist and visitors can then communicate via 2-way video  allowing the receptionist to manage one or many office lobby areas from a central location. the advancement of office automation has eliminated some receptionists  jobs. for example  a telephone call could be answered by an automated attendant. however  a receptionist who possesses strong office/technical skills and who is also adept in courtesy  tact and diplomacy is still considered an asset to a company s business image  and is still very much in demand in the business world.   == see also == secretary   == references ==
a janitor (american english  scottish english)  custodian  porter  cleaner or caretaker is a person who cleans and maintains buildings such as hospitals  schools  and residential accommodation. janitors  primary responsibility is as a cleaner. in some cases  they will also carry out maintenance and security duties. a similar position  but usually with more managerial duties and not including cleaning  is occupied by building superintendents in the united states (and occasionally in canada) and school site managers in schools in the united kingdom. cleaning is one of the most commonly outsourced services.   == occupational tasks == although most of the work performed by janitors and building cleaners is indoors  sometimes it can be outdoors. outdoors work mainly include sweeping walkways  mowing lawns  or shoveling snow. in some facilities or buildings  a separate company may be hired to do outdoor work. office buildings are usually cleaned when they are vacant  so most of the office janitorial staff work during the evening. the work can be physically demanding and sometimes dirty and unpleasant. general janitor duties often include the following tasks   cleaning and restocking bathrooms sinks toilets urinals floor cleaning  refinishing  and polishing (sweeping  mopping  scrubbing and buffing) clearing garbage bins restocking restroom paper products and other supplies such as feminine products and air fresheners cleaning mirrors cleaning floors (mopping  sweeping  polishing) carpet cleaning (dry method  extraction  steam and bonnet) cleaning carpeting (vacuuming) cleaning stainless steel and other special surfaces clearing lunch room/kitchen cleaning tables in cubicles  meeting rooms  etc... emptying trash and recycling bin unlocking and locking buildings at the beginning and end of the day stripping and waxing floors using floor buffer cleaning air-conditioner vents crime scene cleaning (requires being fully certified and pay scale starts from $300.00 to $700.00+ an hour) litter picking spot cleaning (generally spills - coffee for instance) sanitization room setups (college/schools  etc.) porterage (internal deliveries  movement of equipment or people in hospitals) removing vomit  urine  and feces from public areas raising and lowering flags (schools)   === pay scale === in 2010  the median pay of a janitor working in the us was $10.68 per hour. the yearly salary could grow by 11% according to the statistics of 2010.   == office cleaning == office cleaning staff perform many of the same duties as janitors. however the tasks are divided among different members. additional tasks include   watering plants (pruning as well) cleaning sinks  refrigerators  microwaves and toasters in office kitchens  clearing recycling and garbage bins dusting furniture and computer equipment (monitors and desk area  but excluding keyboards) and tables   == outsourcing == cleaning is one of the most commonly outsourced services. some of the reasons for this include   basic cleaning tasks are standardised  with little variation among different enterprises. the nature of the job and required standard of performance can be clearly
defined and specified in a contract  unlike more technical or professional jobs for which such specification is harder to develop. some organizations prefer to outsource work unrelated to their core business in order to save additional salaries and benefits required to manage the work. some organizations may feel uncomfortable dealing with labour relations related to low wage employees  by outsourcing  these labor relations issues are transferred to a contractor whose staff are comfortable and experienced in dealing with these issues  and their approach can benefit from economies of scale. if a janitor is unavailable due to sickness or leave  a contractor which employs many janitors can easily assign a substitute. a small organisation which employs one or a few janitors directly will have much more trouble with this.   == demography == between 17% to 23% of the total undocumented immigrant population living in the united states work in the cleaning industry (and growing at a rate of 1/2% to 1/3% percent per year). in addition to this population offering an abundant source of inexpensive labor  janitorial work is mostly undertaken at night  making it an appealing option for janitorial companies to employ undocumented workers seeking clandestine employment. in the netherlands  the number of cleaning companies grew from 5 000 in 2003 to 8 000 in 2008.   == see also == building superintendent concierge housekeeping property caretaker   == references ==   == further reading == wedgwood  hensleigh (1855).  on false etymologies . transactions of the philological society (6).   == external links ==  the dictionary definition of janitor at wiktionary  media related to janitors at wikimedia commons
a doorman (also porter in british english) is an individual hired to provide courtesy and security services at a residential building or hotel.  they are particularly common in urban luxury highrises.  at a residential building  a doorman is responsible for opening doors and screening visitors and deliveries.  he will often provide other courtesy services such as signing for packages  carrying luggage between the elevator and the street  or hailing taxis for residents and guests.   == history == the occupation dates back at least to the time of plautus under the roman republic where its name was iānitor (from iānua   door  the root of both  january  and  janitor ).   == modern era == the united states house of representatives had an official doorkeeper until the post was abolished in 1995. in new york city  doormen and elevator operators are unionized and typically represented by seiu 32bj. they last went on strike in 1991 and other strikes were narrowly averted in 2006 and 2010.in egypt  doormen are called bawab  and in modern times they have been described by the bbc as a security guard  porter  enforcer of social mores and general snoop  all rolled into one.   == see also == bouncer (doorman) property caretaker concierge receptionist porter (monastery)   == references ==
a cleaner or a cleaning operative is a type of industrial or domestic worker who cleans homes or commercial premises for payment.  cleaning operatives may specialise in cleaning particular things or places  such as window cleaners.  cleaning operatives often work when the people who otherwise occupy the space are not around.  they may clean offices at night or houses during the workday.  the 2000 film bread and roses by british director ken loach depicted the struggle of cleaners in los angeles  california  for better pay and working conditions and for the right to join a union. in an interview with the bbc in 2001  loach stated that thousands of cleaners from around 30 countries have since contacted him with tales similar to the one told in the film.   == types of cleaning operatives == the cleaning industry is quite big as different types of cleaning are required for different objects and different properties. for example  cleaning an office space requires the services of a commercial cleaner whereas cleaning a house requires domestic cleaning services. depending on the task  even these categories can be subdivided into  for example  end-of-lease cleaning  carpet cleaning  upholstery cleaning  window cleaning  car cleaning services etc. cleaners specialize in a specific cleaning sector or even a specific task in a cleaning sector  and one cannot expect a window cleaner to be able or willing to clean a carpet. some types of cleaners are mentioned below.   === apartment/house cleaners === these cleaning operatives are quite easy to find due to their large numbers  and they are usually denoted as maid service providers  janitors  and domestic cleaning operatives. these type of operatives specialize in house cleaning services such as spring cleaning  end-of-lease cleaning etc. most house cleaning operatives are known to pay good attention to details  but due to their large numbers  there is no guarantee that one will find one who is trustworthy and works effectively. the cost of this type of service depends on the demand for the service and the number of providers. in australia  one can hire a household cleaner from anywhere between $20 to $30 an hour. in countries like india  china  the philippines  etc.  where the labor rates are quite low  people can afford a full-time maid or domestic cleaner.   == typical cleaning equipment == the following are some items used by cleaning staff   broom/dustpan buckets with water/cleaning solution cleaning agents floor polisher garbage bag hand feather duster and/or microfibre floor duster mop and mop bucket cart towels used to wipe desks vacuum cleaner wet floor sign   == see also == charwoman cleaning company janitor (caretaker  custodian) maid   == references ==
social work is an academic discipline and profession that concerns itself with individuals  families  groups and communities in an effort to enhance social functioning and overall well-being. social functioning is the way in which people perform their social roles  and the structural institutions that are provided to sustain them. social work applies social sciences  such as sociology  psychology  political science  public health  community development  law  and economics  to engage with client systems  conduct assessments  and develop interventions to solve social and personal problems  and to bring about social change. social work practice is often divided into micro-work  which involves working directly with individuals or small groups  and macro-work  which involves working with communities  and - within social policy - fostering change on a larger scale.the social work industry developed in the 19th century  with some of its roots in voluntary philanthropy and in grassroots organizing. however  responses to social needs had existed long before then  primarily from private charities and from religious organizations. the effects of the industrial revolution and of the great depression of the 1930s placed pressure on social work to become a more defined discipline.   == definition == social work is a broad profession that intersects with several disciplines. social work organizations offer the following definitions  “social work is a practice-based profession and an academic discipline that promotes social change and development  social cohesion  and the empowerment and liberation of people. principles of social justice  human rights  collective responsibility and respect for diversities are central to social work. underpinned by theories of social work  social sciences  humanities and indigenous knowledge  social work engages people and structures to address life challenges and enhance well-being.  –international federation of social workers  social work is a profession concerned with helping individuals  families  groups and communities to enhance their individual and collective well-being. it aims to help people develop their skills and their ability to use their own resources and those of the community to resolve problems. social work is concerned with individual and personal problems but also with broader social issues such as poverty  unemployment  and domestic violence.  –canadian association of social workers                                                                                                                          
       social work practice consists of the professional application of social work values  principles  and techniques to one or more of the following ends  helping people obtain tangible services  counseling and psychotherapy with individuals  families  and groups  helping communities or groups provide or improve social and health services  and participating in legislative processes. the practice of social work requires knowledge of human development and behavior  of social and economic  and cultural institutions  and of the interaction of all these factors.  –national association of social workers social workers work with individuals and families to help improve outcomes in their lives. this may be helping to protect vulnerable people from harm or abuse or supporting people to live independently. social workers support people  act as advocates and direct people to the services they may require. social workers often work in multi-disciplinary teams alongside health and education professionals.  –british association of social workers   == history ==  the practice and profession of social work has a relatively modern and scientific origin  and is generally considered to have developed out of three strands. the first was individual casework  a strategy pioneered by the charity organization society in the mid-19th century  which was founded by helen bosanquet and octavia hill in london  england. most historians identify cos as the pioneering organization of the social theory that led to the emergence of social work as a professional occupation. cos had its main focus on individual casework. the second was social administration  which included various forms of poverty relief –  relief of paupers . statewide poverty relief could be said to have its roots in the english poor laws of the 17th century  but was first systematized through the efforts of the charity organization society. the third consisted of social action – rather than engaging in the resolution of immediate individual requirements  the emphasis was placed on political action working through the community and the group to improve their social conditions and thereby alleviate poverty. this approach was developed originally by the settlement house movement.this was accompanied by a less easily defined movement  the development of institutions to deal with the entire range of social problems. all had their most rapid growth during the nineteenth century  and laid the foundation basis for modern social work  both in theory and in practice.professional social work originated in 19th century england  and had its roots in the social and economic upheaval wrought by the industrial revolution  in particular the societal struggle to deal with the resultant mass urban-based poverty and its related problems. because poverty was the main focus of early social work  it was intricately linked with the idea of charity work.other important historical figures that shaped the growth of the social work profession are jane addams  who founded the hull house in chicago and won the nobel peace prize in 1931  mary
ellen richmond  who wrote social diagnosis  one of the first social work books to incorporate law  medicine  psychiatry  psychology  and history  and william beveridge  who created the social welfare state  framing the debate on social work within the context of social welfare prevision.   == transtheoretical models == social work is an interdisciplinary profession  meaning it draws from a number of areas  such as (but not limited to) psychology  sociology  politics  criminology  economics  ecology  education  health  law  philosophy  anthropology  and counseling  including psychotherapy. field work is a distinctive attribution to social work pedagogy. this equips the trainee in understanding the theories and models within the field of work. professional practitioners from multicultural aspects have their roots in this social work immersion engagements from the early 19th century in the western countries. as an example  here are some of the models and theories used within social work practice    == profession == abraham flexner in a 1915 lecture   is social work a profession  delivered at the national conference on charities and corrections  examined the characteristics of a profession with reference to social work. it is not a  single model  such as that of health  followed by medical professions such as nurses and doctors  but an integrated profession  and the likeness with medical profession is that social work requires a continued study for professional development to retain knowledge and skills that are evidence-based by practice standards. a social work professional s services lead toward the aim of providing beneficial services to individuals  dyads  families  groups  organizations and communities to achieve optimum psychosocial functioning.its seven core functions are described by popple and leighninger as   engagement — the social worker must first engage the client in early meetings to promote a collaborative relationship assessment — data must be gathered that will guide and direct a plan of action to help the client planning — negotiate and formulate an action plan implementation — promote resource acquisition and enhance role performance monitoring/evaluation — on-going documentation through short-term goal attainment of extent to which client is following through supportive counseling — affirming  challenging  encouraging  informing  and exploring options graduated disengagement — seeking to replace the social worker with a naturally occurring resourcesix other core values identified by the national association of social workers  (nasw) code of ethics are   service — help people in need and address social problems social justice — challenge social injustices dignity and worth of the person importance of human relationships integrity — behave in a trustworthy manner competence — practice within the areas of one s areas of expertise and develop and enhance professional skilla historic and defining feature of social work is the profession s focus on individual well-being in a social context and the well-being of society. social workers promote social justice and social
change with and on behalf of clients. a  client  can be an individual  family  group  organization  or community. in the broadening scope of the modern social worker s role  some practitioners have in recent years traveled to war-torn countries to provide psychosocial assistance to families and survivors.newer areas of social work practice involve management science. the growth of  social work administration  for transforming social policies into services and directing activities of an organization toward achievement of goals is a related field. helping clients with accessing benefits such as unemployment insurance and disability benefits  to assist individuals and families in building savings and acquiring assets to improve their financial security over the long-term  to manage large operations  etc. requires social workers to know financial management skills to help clients and organisation s to be financially self-sufficient.financial social work also helps clients with low-income or low to middle-income  people who are either unbanked (do not have a banking account) or underbanked (individuals who have a bank account but tend to rely on high cost non-bank providers for their financial transactions)  with better mediation with financial institutions and induction of money management skills. another area that social workers are focusing is risk management  risk in social work is taken as knight in 1921 defined  if you don t even know for sure what will happen  but you know the odds  that is risk and if you don t even know the odds  that is uncertainty.  risk management in social work means minimizing the risks while increasing potential benefits for clients by analyzing the risks and benefits in duty of care or in decisions.in the united states  according to the substance abuse and mental health services administration (samhsa)  a branch of the u.s. department of health and human services  professional social workers are the largest group of mental health services providers. there are more clinically trained social workers—over 200 000—than psychiatrists  psychologists  and psychiatric nurses combined. federal law and the national institutes of health recognize social work as one of five core mental health professions.examples of fields a social worker may be employed in are poverty relief  life skills education community organizing  community organization  community development  rural development  forensics and corrections  legislation  industrial relations  project management  child protection  elder protection  women s rights  human rights  systems optimization  finance  addictions rehabilitation  child development  cross-cultural mediation  occupational safety and health  disaster management  mental health  psychosocial therapy  disabilities  etc.   == qualifications == the education of social workers begins with a bachelor s degree (ba  bsc  bssw  bsw  etc.) or diploma in social work or a bachelor of social services. some countries offer postgraduate degrees in social work  such as a master s degree (msw  mssw  mss  mssa  ma  msc
 mres  mphil.) or doctoral studies (phd and dsw (doctor of social work)). increasingly  graduates of social work programs pursue post-masters and post-doctoral study  including training in psychotherapy. in the united states  social work undergraduate and master s programs are accredited by the council on social work education. a cswe-accredited degree is required for one to become a state-licensed social worker. the cswe even accredits online master s in social work programs in traditional and advanced standing options. in 1898  the new york charity organization society  which was the columbia university school of social work s earliest entity  began offering formal  social philanthropy  courses  marking both the beginning date for social work education in the united states  as well as the launching of professional social work.a number of countries and jurisdictions require registration or licensure of people working as social workers  and there are mandated qualifications. in other places  a professional association sets academic requirements for admission to the profession. the success of these professional bodies  efforts is demonstrated in that these same requirements are recognized by employers as necessary for employment.   == professional associations == social workers have a number of professional associations that provide ethical guidance and other forms of support for their members and for social work in general. these associations may be international  continental  semi-continental  national  or regional. the main international associations are the international federation of social workers (ifsw) and the international association of schools of social work (iassw). the largest professional social work association in the united states is the national association of social workers. there also exist organizations that represent clinical social workers such as the american association of psychoanalysis in clinical social work. aapcsw is a national organization representing social workers who practice psychoanalytic social work and psychonalysis. there are also a number of states with clinical social work societies which represent all social workers who conduct psychotherapy from a variety of theoretical frameworks with families  groups and individuals. the association for community organization and social administration (acosa) is a professional organization for social workers who practice within the community organizing  policy  and political spheres. in the uk  the professional association is the british association of social workers (basw) with just over 18 000 members (as of august 2015). the code of ethics of the us-based national association of social workers provides a code for daily conduct and a set of principles rooted in 6 core values  service  social justice  dignity and worth of the person  importance of human relationships  integrity  and competence.   == trade unions representing social workers == in the united kingdom  just over half of social workers are employed by local authorities  and many of these are represented by unison  the public sector employee union. smaller numbers are members of the unite the union and the gmb (trade union). the british union of social work employees
(buswe) has been a section of the community (trade union) since 2008. while at that stage not a union  the british association of social workers operated a professional advice and representation service from the early 1990s. social work qualified staff who are also experienced in employment law and industrial relations provide the kind of representation you would expect from a trade union in the event of grievance  discipline or conduct matters specifically in respect of professional conduct or practice. however  this service depended on the good will of employers to allow the representatives to be present at these meetings  as only trade unions have the legal right and entitlement of representation in the workplace. by 2011 several councils had realized that they did not have to permit basw access  and those that were challenged by skilled professional representation of their staff were withdrawing permission. for this reason basw once again took up trade union status by forming its arms length trade union section  swu (social workers union). this gives legal right to represent its members whether the employer or trades union congress (tuc) recognizes swu or not. at 2015 the tuc was still resisting swu application for admission to congress membership and while most employers are not making formal statements of recognition until such a time as the tuc may change its policy  they are all legally required to permit swu (basw) representation at internal discipline hearings etc.   == use of information technology in social work == information technology is vital in social work  it transforms the documentation part of the work into electronic media. this makes the process transparent  accessible  and provides data for analytics. observation is a tool used in social work for developing solutions. anabel quan-haase in technology and society defines the term surveillance as “watching over” (quan-haase. 2016. p 213)  she continues to explain that the observation of others socially and behaviorally is natural  but it becomes more like surveillance when the purpose of the observation is to keep guard over someone (quan-haase. 2016. p 213). often  at the surface level the use of surveillance and surveillance technologies within the social work profession is seemingly an unethical invasion of privacy. when engaging with the social work code of ethics a little more deeply  it becomes obvious that the line between ethical and unethical becomes blurred. within the social work code of ethics  there are multiple mentions of the use of technology within social work practice. the one that seems the most applicable to surveillance or artificial intelligence is 5.02 article f  “when using electronic technology to facilitate evaluation or research” and it goes on to explain that clients should be informed when technology is being used within practice (workers. 2008. article 5.02).   == social workers in literature == in 2011  a critic stated that  novels about social work are rare  and as recently as 2004  another critic claimed to have difficulty finding novels featuring
a main character holding a master of social work degree.however  social workers have been the subject of many novels  including   bohjalian  chris (2007). the double bind  a novel (1st ed.). new york  shaye areheart books. isbn 978-1-4000-4746-8. cooper  philip (2013). social work man. leicester  matador. isbn 978-1-78088-508-7. barrington  freya (2015). known to social services (1st ed.). usa  faraxa publishing. isbn 9789995782870. desai  kishwar (2010). witness the night. london  beautiful books. isbn 978-1-905636-85-3.fadiman  anne (1997). the spirit catches you and you fall down  a hmong child  her american doctors  and the collision of two cultures. new york  farrar  straus and giroux. isbn 978-0-37453-340-3. irish  lola (1993). streets of dust  a novel based on the life of caroline chisholm. kirribilli  n.s.w  eldorado. isbn 1-86412-001-0. greenlee  sam (1990) [1969]. the spook who sat by the door  a novel. african american life. detroit  wayne state university press. isbn 0-8143-2246-8. konrád  györgy (1987). the case worker. writers from the other europe. new york  n.y.  u.s.a  penguin books. isbn 0-14-009946-8. henderson  smith (2014). fourth of july creek  a novel. isbn 978-0-06-228644-4. johnson  greg (2011). a very famous social worker. bloomington  in  iuniverse inc. isbn 978-1-4502-8548-3. johnson  kristin (2012). unprotected  a novel. st. butt  mn  north star press. isbn 978-0-87839-589-7. kalpakian  laura (1992). graced land (1st ed.). new york  grove weidenfeld. isbn 0-8021-1474-1. lewis  sinclair (1933). ann vickers (first ed.). garden city  n.y.  doubleday  doran & company. oclc 288770. mengestu  dinaw (2014). all our names (first ed.). new york  alfred a. knopf. isbn 978-0-385-34998-7. sapphire (1996). push  a novel (1st ed.). new york  alfred a. knopf  random house. isbn 0-679-44626-5. the basis of the movie precious. smith  ali (2011) there but for the  hamish hamilton  pantheon. ungar  michael (2011). the social worker  a novel. lawrencetown  n.s  pottersfield press. isbn 978-1-897426-26-5. weinbren  martin (2010). king welfare. bakewell  peakpublish. isbn 978-1-907219-18-4.   === fictional social workers in media ===   == see also ==   == references ==   == further reading ==   == external links == social work  wcidwtm - the university of tennessee social work evaluation and research resources
a secretary  administrative professional  or personal assistant is a person whose work consists of supporting management  including executives  using a variety of project management  communication  or organizational skills. however this role should not be confused with the role of an executive secretary  who differs from a personal assistant. in many countries  an executive secretary is a high-ranking position in the administrative hierarchy. in fact in pakistan  federal secretaries are dubbed as the most influential people in the country. the functions of a personal assistant may be entirely carried out to assist one other employee or may be for the benefit of more than one. in other situations a secretary is an officer of a society or organization who deals with correspondence  admits new members  and organizes official meetings and events.   == duties and functions == a secretary  also known as a personal assistant (pa) or administrative assistant  has many administrative duties. the title  secretary  is not used as often as in decades past  and responsibilities have evolved to much more advance skill set such as mastering microsoft office applications  word  powerpoint  and excel to name a few. the duties may vary according to the nature and size of the company or organization  and might include managing budgets  bookkeeping  attending telephone calls  handling visitors  maintaining websites  travel arrangements  and preparing expense reports. secretaries might also manage all the administrative details of running a high-level conference or meeting and be responsible for arranging the catering for a lunch meeting. often executives will ask their assistant to take the minutes at meetings and prepare meeting documents for review. in addition to the minutes  the secretary may be responsible for keeping all of the official records of a company or organization. a secretary is also regarded as an  office manager .   == etymology == the term is derived from the latin word secernere   to distinguish  or  to set apart  the passive participle (secretum) meaning  having been set apart  with the eventual connotation of something private or confidential  as with the english word secret. a secretarius was a person  therefore  overseeing business confidentially  usually for a powerful individual (a king  pope  etc.). as the duties of a modern secretary often still include the handling of confidential information  the literal meaning of their title still holds true.   == origin == from the renaissance until the late 19th century  men involved in the daily correspondence and the activities of the powerful had assumed the title of secretary. with time  like many titles  the term was applied to more and varied functions  leading to compound titles to specify various secretarial work better  like general secretary or financial secretary. just  secretary  remained in use either as an abbreviation when clear in the context or for relatively
modest positions such as administrative assistant of the officer(s) in charge  either individually or as member of a secretariat. as such less influential posts became more feminine and common with the multiplication of bureaucracies in the public and private sectors  new words were also coined to describe them  such as personal assistant.   == modern developments == in 1870  sir isaac pitman founded a school where students could qualify as shorthand writers to  professional and commercial men . originally  this school was only for male students. in the 1880s  with the invention of the typewriter  more women began to enter the field and during the upcoming years  especially since world war i  the role of secretary has been primarily associated with women. by the 1930s  fewer men were entering the field of secretaries. in an effort to promote professionalism among united states secretaries  the national secretaries association was created in 1942. today  this organization is known as the international association of administrative professionals (iaap). the organization developed the first standardized test for office workers called the certified professional secretaries examination (cps). it was first administered in 1951. by the mid-20th century  the need for secretaries was great and offices and organizations featured large secretarial pools.  in some cases the demand was great enough to spur secretaries being recruited from overseas  in particular  there was often a steady demand for young british women to come to the u.s. and fill temporary or permanent secretarial positions.  several organizations were created to assist secretaries from foreign lands  including the society of international secretaries and the association of british secretaries in america.in 1952  mary barrett  president of the national secretaries association  c. king woodbridge  president of dictaphone corporation  and american businessman harry f. klemfuss created a special secretary s day holiday  to recognize the hard work of the staff in the office. the holiday caught on  and during the fourth week of april is now celebrated in offices all over the world. it has been renamed  administrative professional s week  to highlight the increased responsibility of today s secretary and other administrative workers  and to avoid embarrassment to those who believe that  secretary  refers only to women or to unskilled workers.   == contemporary employment == in a business  many job descriptions overlap. however  while administrative assistant is a generic term  not necessarily implying directly working for a superior  a secretary is usually the key person for all administrative tasks  and often referred to as the  gate keeper .  other titles describing jobs similar to or overlapping those of the traditional secretary are office coordinator  executive assistant  office manager and administrative professional.  at the most basic level (grade / band 1 or 2) a secretary is usually an audio typist with a small number of administrative roles.  a good command of the
prevailing office language and the ability to type is essential. at higher grades and with more experience they begin to take on additional roles and spend more of their time maintaining physical and electronic files  dealing with the post  photocopying  emailing clients  ordering stationery and answering telephones. a more skilled executive assistant (grade / band 4 to 6) may be required to type at high speeds using technical or foreign languages  organize diaries  itineraries and meetings and carry out administrative duties which may include accountancy. a secretary / executive assistant may also control access to a manager  thus becoming an influential and trusted aide. executive assistants are available for contact during off hours by new electronic communication methods for consultations.  specialized secretaries at higher level also include medical and legal secretaries/personal assistants. the largest difference between a generalized secretary and skilled executive assistants is that the executive assistant is required to be able to interact extensively with the general public  vendors  customers  and any other person or group that the executive is responsible to interact with. as the level that the executive interacts with increases so does the level of skill required in the executive assistant that works with the executive. those executive assistants that work with corporate officers must be capable of emulating the style  corporate philosophy  and corporate persona of the executive for which they work. in the modern workplace the advancement of the executive assistants is codependent on the success of the executive and the ability of both to make the job performance of the team seamless whereas the job place evaluation is reflective of each other s performance executive secretary for now.   == training == in the united states  a variety of skills and adaptability to new situations is necessary. as such  a four-year degree is often preferred and a two-year degree is usually a requirement. another option is to get a professional certification from a national association.   == executive assistant ==   === civilian === the work of an executive assistant (sometimes called a management assistant) differs a great deal from that of an administrative assistant. in many organizations  an executive assistant is a high-ranking position in the administrative hierarchy. executive assistants work for a company officer or executive (at both private and public institutions)  and possess the authority to make crucial decisions affecting the direction of such organizations. as such  executive assistants play a role in decision-making and policy setting.  the executive assistant performs the usual roles of managing correspondence  preparing research  and communication  often with one or more administrative assistants or scheduling assistants who report to him or her. the executive assistant also acts as the  gatekeeper  understanding in varying degree the requirements of the executive  and with an ability through this understanding to decide which scheduled events  meetings  teleconferences  or e-mails are most appropriate for allocation of the executive s time.
an executive assistant may  from time to time  act as proxy for the executives  representing him/her/them in meetings or communications and project managing the production of reports or other deliverables in the absence of the executive. an executive assistant differs from an administrative assistant (a job which is often part of the career path of an executive assistant) in that they are expected to possess a higher degree of business acumen  be able to manage projects  as well as have the ability to influence others on behalf of the executive. in the past  executive assistants were required to have a high school diploma  but increasingly jobs are requiring a bachelor s degree.   === military === in the u.s. department of defense  the title of military assistant (ma) or executive assistant (ea) is typically held by army  air force  and marine corps colonels  lieutenant colonels  and senior majors and navy captains  commanders and senior lieutenant commanders who are in direct support of the secretary of defense  deputy secretary of defense and other civilian defense officials down to the level of a deputy assistant secretary of defense  as well as general officers or flag officers. the secretary of defense also has a lieutenant general or vice admiral as his/her senior military assistant. like their civilian counterparts  eas are also a resource in decision-making  policy setting  and will have leadership oversight of the entire military and civilian staff supporting the civilian official  general officer  or flag officer.  eas are often interchangeable with other senior military officers of equivalent rank holding the title of chief of staff in other service organizations headed by a flag officer or general officer.  in the case of unified combatant commands and service major commands  the chief of staff is often a general officer or flag officer himself/herself  typically at the 1-star or 2-star level  but he or she should not be confused with the 4-star officers holding the title of chief of staff of the army or chief of staff of the air force.   == see also == clerk legal secretary office lady personal assistant receptionist   == references ==   == further reading == national association of parliamentarians®  education committee (1993). spotlight on you the secretary. independence  mo  national association of parliamentarians®. isbn 1-884048-25-0. covert  bryce (may 4  2015).  the slow death of the secretary . the new republic. retrieved may 18  2018. the debate theorical-methodological in field of secretariat  diversities and singularities educational handbooks for professions occupied by females in the 1960s and 1970s.   == external links == american society of administrative professionals administrative professional resources iaap - international association of administrative professionals
a personal assistant  also referred to as personal aide (pa) or personal secretary (ps)  is a job title describing a person who assists a specific person with their daily business or personal tasks.   == duties  responsibilities and functions == an assistant helps with time and daily management  scheduling of meetings  correspondence  and note-taking. the role of a personal assistant can be varied  such as answering phone calls  taking notes  scheduling meetings  emailing  texts  etc. in business or personal contexts  assistants are people who provide services that relieve his or her employer from the stress of tasks that are associated with managing one s personal and/or business life. they assist with a variety of life management tasks  including running errands  arranging travel (e.g.  travel agent services such as purchasing airline tickets  reserving hotel rooms and rental cars  and arranging activities  as well as handling more localized services such as recommending a different route to work based on road or travel conditions)  finance (paying bills  buying and selling stocks)  and shopping (meal planning  remembering special occasions like birthdays). assistants (as) often act as the manager s first point of contact with people from both inside and outside the organization. this means that their tasks and skills can often be divided into two fields of technical skills and personal skills. tasks may include but are not limited to   devising and maintaining office systems  including data management and filing. arranging travel  visas and accommodation and  occasionally  travelling with the manager to take notes or dictation at meetings or to provide general assistance during presentations  screening phone calls  inquiries and requests  and handling them when appropriate  meeting and greeting visitors at all levels of seniority  organizing and maintaining diaries and making appointments  dealing with incoming email  faxes and post  often corresponding on behalf of the manager  taking dictation and minutes  carrying out background research and presenting findings  producing documents  briefing papers  reports and presentations  organizing and attending meetings and ensuring the manager is well prepared for meetings  liaising with clients  suppliers and other staff.in addition to supporting managers  their team and departments  many pas also have their own personal workload and responsibilities. the scope of the pa s role can be extensive and additional duties may include   carrying out specific projects and research  responsibility for accounts and budgets  taking on some of the manager s responsibilities and working more closely with management  deputizing for the manager  making decisions and delegating work to others in the manager s absence  being involved in decision-making processes.   == in business-related phenomena == people who cannot afford to hire their own personal assistants to run errands or answer phone calls full-time can hire a personal concierge or a part-time assistant. most companies offer secretarial
personal assistance as well as basic assistant services like research  scheduling  travel arrangements  and more. costs of a part-time employee can end up exceeding the amount it would have cost to hire a full-time employee. other companies charge a flat monthly fee for personal assistant services based upon the number of requests expected to be placed each month. in addition to the personal assistant services that are provided with the membership  other incentives such as local discounts  concierge services  dining recommendations  and overall knowledge and expertise may even outperform the skills of a regular personal assistant staff member. newer personal assistant companies instead charge a monthly flat rate  which saves money. smaller companies—especially start-up and real estate development companies  small youtube channels and small website owners—may desire the services of a personal assistant to manage an individual executive  or to assist in the office as the new company goes about setting up their new business. these personal assistants may develop great skills at the birth of a new company and have opportunities for advancement. other personal assistants will have garnered valuable knowledge and experience if they choose to move into other positions.   == career development == personal assistants in the business field can be offered positions elsewhere in the company. some are asked to consider full-time positions elsewhere in the company  depending on the level of ambition and education required/ desired. some employers will not see the potential for a personal assistant immediately and thus the personal assistant will remain in that position until other positions become vacant. in more recent years  the celebrity personal assistant has been thrust into the spotlight. many celebrity assistants have used the celebrity s exposure to create their own companies  like madonna s former assistant.   == see also == au pair body man  u.s. political jargon for a personal assistant to a politician or political candidate lifestyle management  an alternative branding for similar tasks   == references ==
a landlord is the owner of a house  apartment  condominium  land or real estate which is rented or leased to an individual or business  who is called a tenant (also a lessee or renter).  when a juristic person is in this position  the term landlord is used. other terms include lessor and owner. the term landlady may be used for female owners  and lessor may be used regardless of gender. the manager of a pub in the united kingdom  strictly speaking a licensed victualler  is referred to as the landlord/lady.   == history == the concept of a landlord may be traced back to the feudal system of manoralism (seignorialism)  where a landed estate is owned by a lord of the manor (mesne lords)  usually members of the lower nobility which came to form the rank of knights in the high medieval period  holding their fief via subinfeudation  but in some cases the land may also be directly subject to a member of higher nobility  as in the royal domain directly owned by a king  or in the holy roman empire imperial villages directly subject to the emperor. the medieval system ultimately continues the system of villas and latifundia (peasant-worked broad farmsteads) of the roman empire.in modern times  landlord describes any individual(s) or entity (e.g. government body or institution) providing housing for persons who cannot afford or do not want to own their own homes. they may be peripatetic  stationed on a secondment away from their home  not want the risk of a mortgage and/or negative equity  may be a group of co-occupiers unwilling to enter into the ties of co-ownership  or may be improving their credit rating or bank balance to obtain a better-terms future mortgage.    === social stigmas of lower-market landlords and tenants in a property-owning culture === renters (tenants or other licensees) at the lowest end of the payment scale may be in social or economic difficulty and due to their address or length of tenure may suffer a social stigma. a sometimes widely promoted social stigma can impact certain for-profit owners of rental property  especially in troubled neighborhoods.  the term  slumlord  /  slum landlord  is sometimes used to describe landlords in those circumstances.  public improvement money/private major economic investment can improve areas and negate the stigma.  in the extreme government compulsory purchase powers in many countries enable slum clearance to replace the worst of neighbourhoods.examples   in minneapolis  downmarket landlords vocally and financially opposed a major reform and redevelopment plan of city officials and  in the 2001 election  succeeded in defeating the incumbent mayor and half the city council.peter rachman was a landlord who operated in notting hill  london in the 1950s and until his 1962 death. he became notorious for exploitation of his tenants  with the word  rachmanism  entering the oxford english dictionary. his henchmen included michael
de freitas (aka michael x/abdul malik)  who created a reputation as a black-power leader  and johnny edgecombe  who became a promoter of jazz and blues  which helped to keep him in the limelight.   == owner and tenant responsibilities == a rental agreement  or lease  is the contract defining such terms as the price paid  penalties for late payments  the length of the rental or lease  and the amount of notice required before either the homeowner or tenant cancels the agreement.  in general  responsibilities are given as follows  the homeowner is responsible for making repairs and performing property maintenance  and the tenant is responsible for keeping the property clean and safe. many owners hire a property management company to take care of all the details of renting their property out to a tenant. this usually includes advertising the property and showing it to prospective tenants  negotiating and preparing the written leases or license agreements    and then  once rented  collecting rent from the tenant and performing repairs as needed.   === united states === in the united states  residential homeowner–tenant disputes are primarily governed by state law (not federal law) regarding property and contracts.  state law and  in some places  city law or county law  sets the requirements for eviction of a tenant.  generally  there are a limited number of reasons for which a landlord or landlady can evict his or her tenant before the expiration of the tenancy  though at the end of the lease term the rental relationship can generally be terminated without giving any reason. some cities  counties  and states have laws establishing the maximum rent a landlord can charge  known as rent control  or rent regulation  and related eviction. there is also an implied warranty of habitability  whereby a landlord must maintain safe  decent and habitable housing  meeting minimum safety requirements such as smoke detectors and a locking door. the most common disputes result from either the landlord s failure to provide services or the tenant s failure to pay rent—the former can also lead to the latter. the withholding of rent is justifiable cause for eviction  as often explained in the lease.   === canada === in canada   residential homeowner–tenant disputes are primarily governed by provincial law (not federal law) regarding property and contracts.  provincial  law sets the requirements for eviction of a tenant.  generally  there are a limited number of reasons for which a landlord  can evict a tenant. some provinces have laws establishing the maximum rent a landlord can charge  known as rent control  or rent regulation  and related eviction. there is also an implied warranty of habitability  whereby a landlord must maintain safe  decent and habitable housing  meeting minimum safety requirements.   === united kingdom ===  residential rental market (tenancies)private sector
renting is largely governed by many of the landlord and tenant acts  in particular the landlord and tenant act 1985 which sets bare minimum standards in tenants  rights against their landlords.  another key statute is the housing act 2004.  rents can be freely increased at the end of a usual six-month duration  on proper notice given to the tenant. a possession order under the most common type  the assured shorthold tenancy (ast) is usually obtainable after eight weeks/two months of unpaid rent  and at the court s discretion after serving the tenant with a section 8 notice (under the housing act 1988 as amended) for a lesser period for all assured tenancies — and on other grounds which defer to the landlord s ownership of the property.  if the tenancy is an ast then any possession order will not take effect until six months has passed into the initial tenancy.  a tenancy of someone who has been in occupation since before 15 january 1989 usually  if not a shorthold from the outset following their inception from 1980 onwards  may be a  regulated tenancy  with many more rights  especially under the rent act 1977 and protection from eviction act 1977  introduced by the third wilson ministry.each house in multiple occupation  a unit the law does not regard it as a single household having more than three tenants  is subject to enhanced regulations including the housing act 2004. a council-issued licence to be a landlord of such a unit is always required in some local authorities (in others  limited to the larger statutory examples).  residential leaseholdtenancies above a couple of years are normally called leases and tend to be long  if more than 7 years a new leasehold estate must be registered. these are governed by few of the above rules and are in longer examples deliberately more akin to full ownership than tenancies  in general.  they seldom require a sizeable ground rent. the law has not regulated hefty break/resale charges nor does it prevent the sale of leasehold houses  in the 2010s certain of these proposals have been widely consulted upon and are being drafted.  broadly  legislation allows such lessees (tenants) to club together to gain the right to manage  and the right to buy the landlord s interest (to collectively enfranchise). it allows them individually to extend their leases for a new  smaller sum ( premium )  which if the tenants have enfranchised will not normally be demanded/recommended every 15-35 years.  notice requirements and forms tend to be strict. in smaller examples the tenant  depending on a simple mathematical division of the building  may be able to enfranchise individually. statute of 1925 implies into nearly all leases (tenancies at low rent and at a premium (fine  initial large sum)) of property that they can be sold (by the lessee  assigned)  reducing any restriction to one whereby the landlord
may apply standard that is  reasonable  vetting  without causing major delay. this is often known as the  statutory qualified covenant on assignment/alienation . in the overall diminishing domain of social housing  exceptionally  lessees widely acquire over time the right to buy for a fixed discount on the market price of the home.  commercial (business) leases and tenanciesin commercial property much of the law  especially as to disputes and basic responsibilities  is based on freedom of contract of the common law including the implied terms of precedent decisions of wide-ranging case law such as the meaning of  good and substantial repair . implied principles include  non-derogation from grant  and  quiet enjoyment . all businesses which are tenants (lessees) must decide whether to contract in or outside of part 2 (i.e. ii) the landlord and tenant act 1954 which gives them  business security of tenure . if not  it generally applies by default. this  security of tenure  is expressly subject to common reasons and associated mechanisms for a landlord to obtain back the premises.  if a landlord is selling a block and a qualifying tenant occupies more than 50%  the tenant should be given the right of first refusal at the asking price to buy the block. as in most jurisdictions the law on rigorous adherence to lease terms on unlawful subletting and assignment can be strictly enforced  resulting in financial and premises loss if broken. failure to repay a rent demand  unlike residential  can result in direct landlord s repossession ( peaceable re-entry ) through a commercial landlord s right to the use of  self-help  evictions  although self-help is rare and restricted in many states.    the taking of a tenant s goods without a court-issued warrant (flowing from a court order or outstanding tax demand) (distress) has been banned.   == rental investment and basis == incentives and disincentivesthe incentive  certainly if not social housing  is to obtain a good rental yield (annual return on investment) and prospect of property price inflation. the disincentives are the locally varying duties of landlords in repair/maintenance and administration — and keynote risks (tenant disputes  damage  neglect  loss of rent  insurance inavailability/disputes  economic slump  increased rate of interest on any mortgage  and negative equity or loss of investment).  net income (yield) and capital growth from letting (renting out) particularly in leveraged buy to let  is subject to idiosyncratic risk  which is considered objectively intensified for a highly leveraged investor limited to a small number of similar profile homes  of narrow rental market appeal in areas lacking economic resilience. basisrental properties can be paid for by the tenant on whatever basis agreed between the landlord and the tenant — more frequently than weekly or less than yearly is almost unheard of — and which is always included in the lease agreement (preferably for both sides in
writing). it should be one of the factors that a tenant considers before moving in.   security for rent and extra fees a landlord or its agent can decide to collect a security deposit (and/or in some jurisdictions such as parts of the us  a move-in/administration fee). a deterrent if high and a relative attractive if low in many markets for a tenant  it is rarely debated in pre-tenancy term negotiations. in some jurisdictions either or both are banned in the original sense. instead a landlord s loss of rent/comprehensive damage insurance may be factored into the rent agreed and/or a special type of deposit  a regulated sum of money as a bond (protected security deposit) from the tenant held by a registered third party (such as certain realty agents) may be permissible.  a deposit is normally by law to be offset against arrears (rent deficits) and damage by or failures to clean/repair by the tenant.   == licensed victualler ==  in the united kingdom the owner and/or manager of a pub (public house) is usually called the  landlord/landlady  and often  strictly incorrectly   publican  the latter properly the appellation of a roman public contractor or tax farmer. in more formal situations  the term used is licensed victualler or simply  licensee . a female landlord can be called either a landlady or simply landlord. the licensed trade charity  formed in 2004 from the merger of the society of licensed victuallers and licensed victualler s national homes  exists to serve the retirement needs of britain s pub landlords. the charity also runs three private schools in ascot and reading in berkshire and sayers common in sussex. as well as having normal full fee paying students  licensed victuallers  school in ascot provides discounted education prices for the children of landlords and others in the catering industry.   == landlord associations == there are significant associations of landlords in various countries. these associations/societies provide support for their  members in facing a range of issues  by providing a means of mutual support  and also lobby relevant authorities and parliament with regard to the details and implementation of residential and some commercial tenancy legislation.  australia numerous landlord associations exist in australia.these associations need to be distinguished from the class of property owner associations that represent the  big end of town    - the owners of major buildings and very large residential housing complexes  such as the property council of australia.property owners association of australia (poaa)property owners association of victoria (poavic) poaq - property owners association of queensland property owners association of nsw property owners association of western australia landlords association of south australia united kingdom residential landlords association (rla)national landlords association (nla)   == see also == building superintendent - a related job. tenement (law)   == references ==
a teacher (also called a school teacher or  in some contexts  an educator) is a person who helps students to acquire knowledge  competence or virtue. informally the role of teacher may be taken on by anyone (e.g. when showing a colleague how to perform a specific task).  in some countries  teaching young people of school age may be carried out in an informal setting  such as within the family (homeschooling)  rather than in a formal setting such as a school or college.  some other professions may involve a significant amount of teaching (e.g. youth worker  pastor). in most countries  formal teaching of students is usually carried out by paid professional teachers. this article focuses on those who are employed  as their main role  to teach others in a formal education context  such as at a school or other place of initial formal education or training.   == duties and functions ==  a teacher s role may vary among cultures. teachers may provide instruction in literacy and numeracy  craftsmanship or vocational training  the arts  religion  civics  community roles  or life skills. formal teaching tasks include preparing lessons according to agreed curricula  giving lessons  and assessing pupil progress. a teacher s professional duties may extend beyond formal teaching. outside of the classroom teachers may accompany students on field trips  supervise study halls  help with the organization of school functions  and serve as supervisors for extracurricular activities.  in some education systems  teachers may be responsible for student discipline.   == competences and qualities required by teachers == teaching is a highly complex activity. this is partially because teaching is a social practice  that takes place in a specific context (time  place  culture  socio-political-economic situation etc.) and therefore is shaped by the values of that specific context. factors that influence what is expected (or required) of teachers include history and tradition  social views about the purpose of education  accepted theories about learning  etc.   === competences === the competences required by a teacher are affected by the different ways in which the role is understood around the world. broadly  there seem to be four models    the teacher as manager of instruction  the teacher as caring person  the teacher as expert learner  and the teacher as cultural and civic person.the organisation for economic co-operation and development has argued that it is necessary to develop a shared definition of the skills and knowledge required by teachers  in order to guide  teachers  career-long education and professional development. some evidence-based international discussions have tried to reach such a common understanding. for example  the european union has identified three broad areas of competences that teachers require   working with others working with knowledge  technology and information  and working in and with society.scholarly consensus is emerging that what is required of
teachers can be grouped under three headings   knowledge (such as  the subject matter itself and knowledge about how to teach it  curricular knowledge  knowledge about the educational sciences  psychology  assessment etc.) craft skills (such as lesson planning  using teaching technologies  managing students and groups  monitoring and assessing learning etc.) and dispositions (such as essential values and attitudes  beliefs and commitment).   === qualities ===   ==== enthusiasm ====  it has been found that teachers who showed enthusiasm towards the course materials and students can create a positive learning experience. these teachers do not teach by rote but attempt to invigorate their teaching of the course materials everyday. teachers who cover the same curriculum repeatedly may find it challenging to maintain their enthusiasm  lest their boredom with the content bore their students in turn. enthusiastic teachers are rated higher by their students than teachers who didn t show much enthusiasm for the course materials.  teachers that exhibit enthusiasm are more likely to have engaged  interested and energetic students who are curious about learning the subject matter. recent research has found a correlation between teacher enthusiasm and students  intrinsic motivation to learn and vitality in the classroom. controlled  experimental studies exploring intrinsic motivation of college students has shown that nonverbal expressions of enthusiasm  such as demonstrative gesturing  dramatic movements which are varied  and emotional facial expressions  result in college students reporting higher levels of intrinsic motivation to learn. but even while a teacher s enthusiasm has been shown to improve motivation and increase task engagement  it does not necessarily improve learning outcomes or memory for the material.there are various mechanisms by which teacher enthusiasm may facilitate higher levels of intrinsic motivation.  teacher enthusiasm may contribute to a classroom atmosphere of energy and enthusiasm which feeds student interest and excitement in learning the subject matter.  enthusiastic teachers may also lead to students becoming more self-determined in their own learning process. the concept of mere exposure indicates that the teacher s enthusiasm may contribute to the student s expectations about intrinsic motivation in the context of learning.  also  enthusiasm may act as a  motivational embellishment  increasing a student s interest by the variety  novelty  and surprise of the enthusiastic teacher s presentation of the material. finally  the concept of emotional contagion may also apply  students may become more intrinsically motivated by catching onto the enthusiasm and energy of the teacher.   ==== interaction with learners ==== research shows that student motivation and attitudes towards school are closely linked to student-teacher relationships. enthusiastic teachers are particularly good at creating beneficial relations with their students. their ability to create effective learning environments that foster student achievement depends on the kind of relationship they build with their students. useful teacher-to-student interactions are crucial in linking academic success with personal achievement. here  personal success is a student s internal goal of improving himself 
whereas academic success includes the goals he receives from his superior. a teacher must guide her student in aligning her personal goals with her academic goals. students who receive this positive influence show stronger self-confidence and greater personal and academic success than those without these teacher interactions.students are likely to build stronger relations with teachers who are friendly and supportive and will show more interest in courses taught by these teachers. teachers that spend more time interacting and working directly with students are perceived as supportive and effective teachers. effective teachers have been shown to invite student participation and decision making  allow humor into their classroom  and demonstrate a willingness to play.   == teaching qualifications == in many countries  a person who wishes to become a teacher must first obtain specified professional qualifications or credentials from a university or college. these professional qualifications may include the study of pedagogy  the science of teaching.  teachers  like other professionals  may have to  or choose to  continue their education after they qualify  a process known as continuing professional development. the issue of teacher qualifications is linked to the status of the profession. in some societies  teachers enjoy a status on a par with physicians  lawyers  engineers  and accountants  in others  the status of the profession is low. in the twentieth century  many intelligent women were unable to get jobs in corporations or governments so many chose teaching as a default profession. as women become more welcomed into corporations and governments today  it may be more difficult to attract qualified teachers in the future. teachers are often required to undergo a course of initial education at a  college of education to ensure that they possess the necessary knowledge  competences and adhere to relevant codes of ethics. there are a variety of bodies designed to instill  preserve and update the knowledge and professional standing of teachers. around the world many teachers  colleges exist  they may be controlled by government or by the teaching profession itself. they are generally established to serve and protect the public interest through certifying  governing  quality controlling  and enforcing standards of practice for the teaching profession.   === professional standards === the functions of the teachers  colleges may include setting out clear standards of practice  providing for the ongoing education of teachers  investigating complaints involving members  conducting hearings into allegations of professional misconduct and taking appropriate disciplinary action and accrediting teacher education programs. in many situations teachers in publicly funded schools must be members in good standing with the college  and private schools may also require their teachers to be college members. in other areas these roles may belong to the state board of education  the superintendent of public instruction  the state education agency or other governmental bodies. in still other areas teaching unions may be responsible for some or all of these duties.   ====
professional misconduct ====  misconduct by teachers  especially sexual misconduct  has been getting increased scrutiny from the media and the courts. a study by the american association of university women reported that 9.6% of students in the united states claim to have received unwanted sexual attention from an adult associated with education  be they a volunteer  bus driver  teacher  administrator or other adult  sometime during their educational career.a study in england showed a 0.3% prevalence of sexual abuse by any professional  a group that included priests  religious leaders  and case workers as well as teachers. it is important to note  however  that this british study is the only one of its kind and consisted of  a random ... probability sample of 2 869 young people between the ages of 18 and 24 in a computer-assisted study  and that the questions referred to  sexual abuse with a professional  not necessarily a teacher. it is therefore logical to conclude that information on the percentage of abuses by teachers in the united kingdom is not explicitly available and therefore not necessarily reliable. the aauw study  however  posed questions about fourteen types of sexual harassment and various degrees of frequency and included only abuses by teachers.  the sample was drawn from a list of 80 000 schools to create a stratified two-stage sample design of 2 065 8th to 11th grade students . its reliability was gauged at 95% with a 4% margin of error. in the united states especially  several high-profile cases such as debra lafave  pamela rogers  and mary kay letourneau have caused increased scrutiny on teacher misconduct. chris keates  the general secretary of national association of schoolmasters union of women teachers  said that teachers who have sex with pupils over the age of consent should not be placed on the sex offenders register and that prosecution for statutory rape  is a real anomaly in the law that we are concerned about.  this has led to outrage from child protection and parental rights groups. fears of being labelled a pedophile or hebephile has led to several men who enjoy teaching avoiding the profession. this has in some jurisdictions reportedly led to a shortage of male teachers.   == pedagogy and teaching ==  teachers facilitate student learning  often in a school or academy or perhaps in another environment such as outdoors.  the objective is typically accomplished through either an informal or formal approach to learning  including a course of study and lesson plan that teaches skills  knowledge or thinking skills. different ways to teach are often referred to as pedagogy. when deciding what teaching method to use teachers consider students  background knowledge  environment  and their learning goals as well as standardized curricula as determined by the relevant authority. many times  teachers assist in learning outside of the classroom by accompanying students on field trips. the increasing use of technology
 specifically the rise of the internet over the past decade  has begun to shape the way teachers approach their roles in the classroom. the objective is typically a course of study  lesson plan  or a practical skill. a teacher may follow standardized curricula as determined by the relevant authority. the teacher may interact with students of different ages  from infants to adults  students with different abilities and students with learning disabilities. teaching using pedagogy also involve assessing the educational levels of the students on particular skills. understanding the pedagogy of the students in a classroom involves using differentiated instruction as well as supervision to meet the needs of all students in the classroom. pedagogy can be thought of in two manners. first  teaching itself can be taught in many different ways  hence  using a pedagogy of teaching styles. second  the pedagogy of the learners comes into play when a teacher assesses the pedagogic diversity of his/her students and differentiates for the individual students accordingly. for example  an experienced teacher and parent described the place of a teacher in learning as follows   the real bulk of learning takes place in self-study and problem solving with a lot of feedback around that loop. the function of the teacher is to pressure the lazy  inspire the bored  deflate the cocky  encourage the timid  detect and correct individual flaws  and broaden the viewpoint of all. this function looks like that of a coach using the whole gamut of psychology to get each new class of rookies off the bench and into the game. perhaps the most significant difference between primary school and secondary school teaching is the relationship between teachers and children. in primary schools each class has a teacher who stays with them for most of the week and will teach them the whole curriculum. in secondary schools they will be taught by different subject specialists each session during the week and may have ten or more different teachers. the relationship between children and their teachers tends to be closer in the primary school where they act as form tutor  specialist teacher and surrogate parent during the course of the day. this is true throughout most of the united states as well. however  alternative approaches for primary education do exist. one of these  sometimes referred to as a  platoon  system  involves placing a group of students together in one class that moves from one specialist to another for every subject. the advantage here is that students learn from teachers who specialize in one subject and who tend to be more knowledgeable in that one area than a teacher who teaches many subjects. students still derive a strong sense of security by staying with the same group of peers for all classes. co-teaching has also become a new trend amongst educational institutions. co-teaching is defined as two or more teachers working harmoniously to fulfill the needs of every student in the classroom.
co-teaching focuses the student on learning by providing a social networking support that allows them to reach their full cognitive potential. co-teachers work in sync with one another to create a climate of learning.   === classroom management ===   ==== teachers and school discipline ====  throughout the history of education the most common form of school discipline was corporal punishment. while a child was in school  a teacher was expected to act as a substitute parent  with all the normal forms of parental discipline open to them.  in past times  corporal punishment (spanking or paddling or caning or strapping or birching the student in order to cause physical pain) was one of the most common forms of school discipline throughout much of the world. most western countries  and some others  have now banned it  but it remains lawful in the united states following a us supreme court decision in 1977 which held that paddling did not violate the us constitution.30 us states have banned corporal punishment  the others (mostly in the south) have not. it is still used to a significant (though declining) degree in some public schools in alabama  arkansas  georgia  louisiana  mississippi  oklahoma  tennessee and texas. private schools in these and most other states may also use it. corporal punishment in american schools is administered to the seat of the student s trousers or skirt with a specially made wooden paddle. this often used to take place in the classroom or hallway  but nowadays the punishment is usually given privately in the principal s office. official corporal punishment  often by caning  remains commonplace in schools in some asian  african and caribbean countries. currently detention is one of the most common punishments in schools in the united states  the uk  ireland  singapore and other countries. it requires the pupil to remain in school at a given time in the school day (such as lunch  recess or after school)  or even to attend school on a non-school day  e.g.  saturday detention  held at some schools. during detention  students normally have to sit in a classroom and do work  write lines or a punishment essay  or sit quietly. a modern example of school discipline in north america and western europe relies upon the idea of an assertive teacher who is prepared to impose their will upon a class. positive reinforcement is balanced with immediate and fair punishment for misbehavior and firm  clear boundaries define what is appropriate and inappropriate behavior. teachers are expected to respect their students  sarcasm and attempts to humiliate pupils are seen as falling outside of what constitutes reasonable discipline.whilst this is the consensus viewpoint amongst the majority of academics  some teachers and parents advocate a more assertive and confrontational style of discipline (refer to canter model of discipline). such individuals claim that many problems with modern schooling stem from the weakness in school
discipline and if teachers exercised firm control over the classroom they would be able to teach more efficiently. this viewpoint is supported by the educational attainment of countries—in east asia for instance—that combine strict discipline with high standards of education.it s not clear  however that this stereotypical view reflects the reality of east asian classrooms or that the educational goals in these countries are commensurable with those in western countries. in japan  for example  although average attainment on standardized tests may exceed those in western countries  classroom discipline and behavior is highly problematic. although  officially  schools have extremely rigid codes of behavior  in practice many teachers find the students unmanageable and do not enforce discipline at all. where school class sizes are typically 40 to 50 students  maintaining order in the classroom can divert the teacher from instruction  leaving little opportunity for concentration and focus on what is being taught. in response  teachers may concentrate their attention on motivated students  ignoring attention-seeking and disruptive students. the result of this is that motivated students  facing demanding university entrance examinations  receive disproportionate resources. given the emphasis on attainment of university places  administrators and governors may regard this policy as appropriate.   ==== obligation to honor students rights ====  sudbury model democratic schools claim that popularly based authority can maintain order more effectively than dictatorial authority for governments and schools alike. they also claim that in these schools the preservation of public order is easier and more efficient than anywhere else. primarily because rules and regulations are made by the community as a whole  thence the school atmosphere is one of persuasion and negotiation  rather than confrontation since there is no one to confront. sudbury model democratic schools  proponents argue that a school that has good  clear laws  fairly and democratically passed by the entire school community  and a good judicial system for enforcing these laws  is a school in which community discipline prevails  and in which an increasingly sophisticated concept of law and order develops  against other schools today  where rules are arbitrary  authority is absolute  punishment is capricious  and due process of law is unknown.   == occupational hazards ==  teachers face several occupational hazards in their line of work  including occupational stress  which can negatively impact teachers  mental and physical health  productivity  and students  performance. stress can be caused by organizational change  relationships with students  fellow teachers  and administrative personnel  working environment  expectations to substitute  long hours with a heavy workload  and inspections. teachers are also at high risk for occupational burnout.a 2000 study found that 42% of uk teachers experienced occupational stress  twice the figure for the average profession. a 2012 study found that teachers experienced double the rate of anxiety  depression  and stress than average workers.there are several ways to mitigate the occupational
hazards of teaching. organizational interventions  like changing teachers  schedules  providing support networks and mentoring  changing the work environment  and offering promotions and bonuses  may be effective in helping to reduce occupational stress among teachers. individual-level interventions  including stress-management training and counseling  are also used to relieve occupational stress among teachers.apart from this  teachers are often not given sufficient opportunities for professional growth or promotions. this leads to some stagnancy  as there is not sufficient interests to enter the profession. an organisation in india called centre for teacher accreditation (centa) is working to reduce this hazard  by trying to open opportunities for teachers in india.   == teaching around the world ==  there are many similarities and differences among teachers around the world. in almost all countries teachers are educated in a university or college. governments may require certification by a recognized body before they can teach in a school. in many countries  elementary school education certificate is earned after completion of high school. the high school student follows an education specialty track  obtain the prerequisite  student-teaching  time  and receive a special diploma to begin teaching after graduation. in addition to certification  many educational institutions especially within the us  require that prospective teachers pass a background check and psychiatric evaluation to be able to teach in classroom. this is not always the case with adult further learning institutions but is fast becoming the norm in many countries as security concerns grow. international schools generally follow an english-speaking  western curriculum and are aimed at expatriate communities.   === australia ===  education in australia is primarily the responsibility of the individual states and territories. generally  education in australia follows the three-tier model which includes primary education (primary schools)  followed by secondary education (secondary schools/high schools) and tertiary education (universities or tafe colleges).   === canada ===  teaching in canada requires a post-secondary degree bachelor s degree. in most provinces a second bachelor s degree such as a bachelor of education is required to become a qualified teacher. salary ranges from $40 000/year to $90 000/yr. teachers have the option to teach for a public school which is funded by the provincial government or teaching in a private school which is funded by the private sector  businesses and sponsors.   === france ===  in france  teachers  or professors  are mainly civil servants  recruited by competitive examination.   === germany ===  in germany  teachers are mainly civil servants recruited in special university classes  called lehramtstudien (teaching education studies). there are many differences between the teachers for elementary schools (grundschule)  lower secondary schools (hauptschule)  middle level secondary schools (realschule) and higher level secondary schools (gymnasium). salaries for teachers depend on the civil servants  salary index scale (bundesbesoldungsordnung).   === india ===  in ancient india  the most common form of education was gurukula based on
the guru-shishya tradition (teacher-disciple tradition) which involved the disciple and guru living in the same (or a nearby) residence. these gurukulam was supported by public donations and the guru would not accept any fees from the shishya. this organized system stayed the most prominent form of education in the indian subcontinent until the british invasion. through strong efforts in 1886 and 1948  the gurukula system was revived in india.the role and success of a teacher in the modern indian education system is clearly defined. centa standards define the competencies that a good teacher should possess. schools look for competent teachers across grades. teachers are appointed directly by schools in private sector  and through eligibility tests in government schools.   === ireland ===  salaries for primary teachers in ireland depend mainly on seniority (i.e. holding the position of principal  deputy principal or assistant principal)  experience and qualifications. extra pay is also given for teaching through the irish language  in a gaeltacht area or on an island. the basic pay for a starting teacher is €27 814 p.a.  rising incrementally to €53 423 for a teacher with 25 years service. a principal of a large school with many years experience and several qualifications (m.a.  h.dip.  etc.) could earn over €90 000.teachers are required to be registered with the teaching council  under section 30 of the teaching council act 2001  a person employed in any capacity in a recognised teaching post - who is not registered with the teaching council - may not be paid from oireachtas funds.from 2006 garda vetting has been introduced for new entrants to the teaching profession. these procedures apply to teaching and also to non-teaching posts and those who refuse vetting  cannot be appointed or engaged by the school in any capacity including in a voluntary role . existing staff will be vetted on a phased basis.   === united kingdom ===  education in the united kingdom is a devolved matter with each of the countries of the united kingdom having separate systems.   ==== england ====  salaries for nursery  primary and secondary school teachers ranged from £20 133 to £41 004 in september 2007  although some salaries can go much higher depending on experience and extra responsibilities. preschool teachers may earn an average salary of £19 543 annually. teachers in state schools must have at least a bachelor s degree  complete an approved teacher education program  and be licensed. many counties offer alternative licensing programs to attract people into teaching  especially for hard-to-fill positions. excellent job opportunities are expected as retirements  especially among secondary school teachers  outweigh slowing enrollment growth  opportunities will vary by geographic area and subject taught.   ==== scotland ====  in scotland  anyone wishing to teach must be registered with the general teaching council for scotland (gtcs). teaching in scotland is an all graduate profession and the normal route for graduates wishing to teach is to complete a
programme of initial teacher education (ite) at one of the seven scottish universities who offer these courses. once successfully completed   provisional registration  is given by the gtcs which is raised to  full registration  status after a year if there is sufficient evidence to show that the  standard for full registration  has been met.for the salary year beginning april 2008  unpromoted teachers in scotland earned from £20 427 for a probationer  up to £32 583 after 6 years teaching  but could then go on to earn up to £39 942 as they complete the modules to earn chartered teacher status (requiring at least 6 years at up to two modules per year.) promotion to principal teacher positions attracts a salary of between £34 566 and £44 616  deputy head  and head teachers earn from £40 290 to £78 642. teachers in scotland can be registered members of trade unions with the main ones being the educational institute of scotland and the scottish secondary teachers  association.   ==== wales ====  education in wales differs in certain respects from education elsewhere in the united kingdom. for example  a significant number of students all over wales are educated either wholly or largely through the medium of welsh  in 2008/09  22 per cent of classes in maintained primary schools used welsh as the sole or main medium of instruction. welsh medium education is available to all age groups through nurseries  schools  colleges and universities and in adult education  lessons in the language itself are compulsory for all pupils until the age of 16. teachers in wales can be registered members of trade unions such as atl  nut or nasuwt and reports in recent years suggest that the average age of teachers in wales is falling with teachers being younger than in previous years. a growing cause of concern are that attacks on teachers in welsh schools which reached an all-time high between 2005 and 2010.   === united states ===  in the united states  each state determines the requirements for getting a license to teach in public schools. teaching certification generally lasts three years  but teachers can receive certificates that last as long as ten years. public school teachers are required to have a bachelor s degree and the majority must be certified by the state in which they teach. many charter schools do not require that their teachers be certified  provided they meet the standards to be highly qualified as set by no child left behind. additionally  the requirements for substitute/temporary teachers are generally not as rigorous as those for full-time professionals. the bureau of labor statistics estimates that there are 1.4 million elementary school teachers  674 000 middle school teachers  and 1 million secondary school teachers employed in the u.s.in the past  teachers have been paid relatively low salaries. however  average teacher salaries have improved rapidly in recent years. us teachers are generally
paid on graduated scales  with income depending on experience. teachers with more experience and higher education earn more than those with a standard bachelor s degree and certificate. salaries vary greatly depending on state  relative cost of living  and grade taught. salaries also vary within states where wealthy suburban school districts generally have higher salary schedules than other districts. the median salary for all primary and secondary teachers was $46 000 in 2004  with the average entry salary for a teacher with a bachelor s degree being an estimated $32 000. median salaries for preschool teachers  however  were less than half the national median for secondary teachers  clock in at an estimated $21 000 in 2004. for high school teachers  median salaries in 2007 ranged from $35 000 in south dakota to $71 000 in new york  with a national median of $52 000. some contracts may include long-term disability insurance  life insurance  emergency/personal leave and investment options.the american federation of teachers  teacher salary survey for the 2006-07 school year found that the average teacher salary was $51 009. in a salary survey report for k-12 teachers  elementary school teachers had the lowest median salary earning $39 259. high school teachers had the highest median salary earning $41 855. many teachers take advantage of the opportunity to increase their income by supervising after-school programs and other extracurricular activities. in addition to monetary compensation  public school teachers may also enjoy greater benefits (like health insurance) compared to other occupations. merit pay systems are on the rise for teachers  paying teachers extra money based on excellent classroom evaluations  high test scores and for high success at their overall school. also  with the advent of the internet  many teachers are now selling their lesson plans to other teachers through the web in order to earn supplemental income  most notably on teacherspayteachers.com.   == notable educators ==   == assistant teachers == assistant teachers are additional teachers assisting the primary teacher  often in the same classroom.  there are different types around the world  as well as a variety of formal programs defining roles and responsibilities. one type is a foreign language assistant  which in germany is run by the educational exchange service (pädagogischer austauschdienst). british schools employ teaching assistants  who are not considered fully qualified teachers  and as such  are guided by teachers but may supervise and teach groups of pupils independently. in the united kingdom  the term  assistant teacher  used to be used to refer to any qualified or unqualified teacher who was not a head or deputy head teacher.the japanese education system employs assistant language teachers in elementary  junior high and high schools. learning by teaching (german short form  ldl) is a method which allows pupils and students to prepare and teach lessons or parts of lessons  with the understanding that a student s own learning is enhanced through the
teaching process.   == see also ==   == references ==   == external links == oecd s education gps  a review of education policy analysis and statistics  teachers
lecturer is an academic rank within many universities  though the meaning of the term varies somewhat from country to country. it generally denotes an academic expert who is hired to teach on a full- or part-time basis. they may also conduct research.   == united kingdom ==  in the uk  the term lecturer is ambiguous and covers several academic ranks. the key distinction is between permanent/open-ended or temporary/fixed-term lectureships. a permanent lecturer in uk universities usually holds an open-ended position that covers teaching  research  and administrative responsibilities. permanent lectureships are tenure-track or tenured positions that are equivalent to an assistant or associate professorship in north america. after a number of years  a lecturer may be promoted based on his or her research record to become a senior lecturer. this position is below reader and professor. research lecturers (where they are permanent appointments) are the equivalent in rank of lecturers and senior lecturers  but reflect a research-intensive orientation. research lecturers are common in fields such as medicine  engineering  and biological and physical sciences. in contrast  fixed-term or temporary lecturers are appointed for specific short-term teaching needs. these positions are often non-renewable and are common post-doctoral appointments. in north american terms  a fixed-term lecturer can hold an equivalent rank to assistant professor without tenure. typically  longer contracts denote greater seniority or higher rank. teaching fellows may also sometimes be referred to as lecturers—for example  exeter named some of that group as education and scholarship lecturers (e & s) to recognise the contribution of teaching  and elevate the titles of teaching fellows to lecturers. some universities also refer to graduate students or others  who undertake ad-hoc teaching for a department sessional lecturers. like adjunct professors and sessional lecturers in north america  these non-permanent teaching staff are often very poorly paid (as little as £6000 p.a. in 2011-12).  these varying uses of the term lecturer cause confusion for non-uk academics. as a proportion of uk academic staff  the proportion of permanent lectureships has fallen considerably. this is one reason why permanent lectureships are usually secured only after several years of post-doctoral experience. data from the higher education statistics agency show that in 2013-14  36 per cent of full- and part-time academic staff were on fixed-term contracts  down from 45 per cent a decade earlier. over the same period  the proportion of academic staff on permanent contracts rose from 55 per cent to 64 per cent. others were on contracts classed as “atypical”.    === historical use === historically in the uk  promotion to a senior lectureship reflected prowess in teaching or administration rather than research  and the position was much less likely to lead direct to promotion to professor.in contrast  promotion to senior lecturer nowadays is based on research achievements (for research-intensive universities)  and is an integral part of the promotion path to a full chair. promotion to reader is sometimes still necessary before promotion to a full
chair  however  some universities no longer make appointments at the level of reader (for instance  the university of leeds and the university of oxford). senior lecturers and readers are sometimes paid on the same salary scale  although readers are recognized as more senior. readers in pre-1992 universities are generally considered at least the equivalent  in terms of status  of (full) professors in post-1992 universities. many academics consider it more prestigious to have been a reader in a pre-1992 university than a professor in a post-1992 university.many open-ended lecturers in the uk have a doctorate (50.1% in 2009-2010) and often have postdoctoral research experience. in almost all fields  a doctorate is a prerequisite  although historically this was not the case. some academic positions could have been held on the basis of research merit alone  without a higher degree.   === current uses === the new universities (that is universities that were until 1992 termed polytechnics) have a slightly different ranking naming scheme from the older universities. many pre-1992 universities use the grades  lecturer (a)  lecturer (b)  senior lecturer  reader  professor. meanwhile  post-1992 grades are normally  lecturer  senior lecturer  principal lecturer (management-focused) or reader (research-focused)  professor. much confusion surrounds the differing use of the  senior lecturer  title. a senior lecturer in a post-1992 university is equivalent to a lecturer (b) in a pre-1992 university  whereas a senior lecturer in a pre-1992 university is most often equivalent to a principal lecturer in a post-1992 university.according to the times higher education  the university of warwick decided in 2006  to break away from hundreds of years of academic tradition  renaming lecturers  assistant professors  senior lecturers and readers  associate professors  while still calling professors  professors . the radical move will horrify those who believe the  professor  title should be reserved for an academic elite.  nottingham has a mixture of the standard uk system  and the system at warwick  with both lecturers and assistant professors. at reading  job advertisements and academic staff web pages use the title associate professor  but the ordinances of the university make no reference to these titles. they address only procedures for conferring the traditional uk academic ranks.   === tenure and permanent lectureships === since the conservatives  1988 education reform act  the ironclad tenure that used to exist in the uk has given way to a less secure form of tenure. technically  university vice-chancellors can make individual faculty members redundant for poor performance or institute departmental redundancies  but in practice  this is rare. the most noted use of this policy happened in 2012 at queen mary university of london where lecturers on permanent contracts were fired. the institutions now has a stated policy of firing and replacing under-performing teaching staff members. this policy is complicated by the 2008 ball v aberdeen tribunal decision  the distinction between teaching and research
faculty is blurring- with implications for who can and cannot be made redundant at uk universities  and under what conditions. despite this recent erosion of tenure in the uk  it is still practiced in most universities. permanent contracts use the word  tenure  for lecturers who are  reappointed to the retiring age . this is equivalent to a us tenure decision—references are sought from world-leading academics and tenure and promotions committees meet to decide  tenure  cases. there is normally no title elevation in such instances—tenure and title are independent.   == comparison == the table presents a broad overview of the traditional main systems  but there are universities which use a combination of those systems or other titles. note that some universities in commonwealth countries have adopted the american system in place of the commonwealth system.   == united states ==  as different us academic institutions use the term lecturer in various ways  there is sometimes confusion. on a generic level  the term broadly denotes one who teaches at a university but is not eligible for tenure and has no research obligations. at non-research colleges  the latter distinction is less meaningful  making the absence of tenure the main difference between lecturers and other academic faculty. unlike the adjective adjunct (which can modify most academic titles  from professor to lecturer to instructor  etc. and refers to part-time status)  the title of lecturer at most schools does not address the issue of full-time vs. part-time status. lecturers are almost always required to have at least a master s degree and quite often have earned doctorates. (for example  at columbia university in new york  the title of lecturer actually requires a doctorate or its professional equivalent  they also use the term for  instructors in specialized programs. )  sometimes the title is used as an equivalent-alternative to instructor  but schools that use both titles tend to provide relatively more advancement potential (e.g. multiple ranks of progression  at least some of which entail faculty voting privileges or faculty committee service) to their lecturers.major research universities are more frequently hiring full-time lecturers  whose responsibilities tend to focus primarily in undergraduate education  especially for introductory/survey courses. in addition to the reason of higher-ranking faculty tending to prefer higher-level courses  part of the reason is also cost-savings  as non-tenure-track faculty tend to have lower salaries. when a lecturer is part-time  there is little practical distinction in the position from an adjunct professor/instructor/etc.  since all non-tenure-track faculty by definition are not on the tenure-track. however  for full-time lecturers (or those regularly salaried above some stated level  such as half-time)  many institutions now incorporate the role quite formally—managing it with performance reviews  promotional tracks  administrative service responsibilities  and many faculty privileges (e.g. voting  use of resources  etc.).an emerging alternative to using full-time lecturers at research institutions is to create a parallel professorship track that
is focused on teaching. it may offer tenure  and typically has a title series such as teaching professor. (this is analogous to the research-only faculty tracks at some universities  which typically have title series such as research professor/scientist/scholar.)  a related concept—at least in professional fields—is the clinical professor or professor of practice  which in addition to a teaching focus (vs. research)  also tend to have a practical/professional/skills oriented focus (vs. theory and scholarship  etc.). in some institutions  the position of lecturer  especially  distinguished lecturer  may also refer to a position somewhat similar to emeritus professor or a temporary post used for visiting academics of considerable prominence—e.g. a famous writer may serve for a term or a year  for instance. when confusion arose about president barack obama s status on the law faculty at the university of chicago  the institution stated that although his title was  senior lecturer  the university considered him to be a  professor  and further noted that it uses that title for notable people  such as federal judges and politicians  who are deemed of high prestige but lack the time to commit to a traditional tenure-track position.  while other universities instead use the term  senior  as simply a matter of rank or promotion  all such references to lecturers of any rank are consistent with the normal u.s. practice of using lower-case-p  professor  as a common noun for anyone who teaches college  as well as a pre-nominal title of address (e.g.  professor smith ) without necessarily referring to job title or position rank (e.g.  john smith  assistant/associate/full professor of x ).   == australia ==  in australia  the term lecturer may be used informally to refer to anyone who conducts lectures at a university or elsewhere  but formally refers to a specific academic rank. the academic ranks in australia are similar to those in the uk  with the rank of associate professor roughly equivalent to reader in uk universities. the academic levels in australia are (in ascending academic level)  a) associate lecturer  (b) lecturer  (c) senior lecturer  (d) associate professor  and (e) professor.   == india ==  in india  one can appear for interviews for a post of a lecturer after passing the combility test]] conducted by the university grants commission. the position is equivalent to assistant professor in the us system. the term is not universally applied  with some universities preferring the lecturer/reader /professor titles  while others work with the assistant professor/associate professor/professor title. as such  most lecturers  position can be considered tenure track. in many states of india  the term lecturer or post graduate teacher (pgt) is also used for the intermediate college teachers. the intermediate colleges or junior colleges are equivalent to higher secondary schools. such lecturers are subject experts specifically engaged to teach a particular subject in higher classes.  
== other countries ==  in other countries  usage varies. in israel  the term has a meaning in academia similar to that in the uk. in france  the title maître de conférences ( lecture master ) is a permanent position that covers research and teaching (and usually administrative responsibilities). it is the lower of the two permanent faculty ranks (the other being professeur des universités or  university professor ). the title of lecteur is used for teachers of foreign languages with no research responsibilities.in german-speaking countries  the term lektor historically denoted a teaching position below a professor  primarily responsible for delivering and organizing lectures. the contemporary equivalent is dozent or . nowadays  the german term lektor exists only in philology or modern-language departments at german-speaking universities for positions that primarily involve teaching a foreign language.  the equivalent rank within the german university system is something like juniorprofessor  dozent  hochschuldozent  juniordozent  akademischer rat or -oberrat   lehrkraft für besondere aufgaben  and the like. in poland  the related term wykładowca is used for a teaching-only position. in russia  a lektor is not an academic rank or a position name  but simply a description of an educator who delivers a set of lectures on a specific course. the title doesn t carry any particular teaching or research obligations and is simply a technical description. while lektors tend to be senior educators (such as professors or associate professors)  any member of the faculty from an associate up can deliver lectures. in norway  a lektor  university lektor and university college lektor are academic ranks at universities and university colleges in norway. the requirements for such position is a combination of relevant degree on master level (five years master or bachelor plus two years master) or higher  research experience  teaching experience and pedagogic education and training. the rank is similar to lecturer in great britain. the rank is also an academic rank which enables a teacher to lecture at ungdomsskole (secondary school) on specialized fields and videregående skole (high school) level. all teacher students in norway are now required to reach a master s degree in order to be able to teach at all levels up to universities and university colleges.  in sweden and denmark  a lektor or universitetslektor is an academic rank similar to that of senior lecturer in great britain and associate professor in usa. the lektor holds the position below professor in rank. in singapore  a lecturer at the national university of singapore is a full-time and renewable position that includes both the opportunities for research funding and for promotion to associate professor on the educator track. it is equivalent to teaching assistant professor at a us university. in south korea  the term gangsa is the literal translation of  part-time lecturer . a gangsa is usually part-time  paid by the number of hours of teaching. no research or administrative obligation is attached. in most disciplines  gangsa
is regarded as a first step in one s academic career. in korea  the tenure position started from  full-time lecturer . the tenure track positions in south korea are  full-time lecturer (junimgangsa)   assistant professor (jokyosu)   associate professor (bukyosu)  and  professor (kyosu) . therefore   full-time lecturer  is the same position as  assistant professor  in other countries  including the usa. in the netherlands  a  lector  used to be equivalent to the rank of associate professor at universities. nowadays  it is the highest rank at so-called  applied universities  (i.e.  school providing higher vocational/professional training to their students). at regular universities  this rank does not exist anymore.       == references ==   == external links ==  media related to lecturers at wikimedia commons
a tutor  formally also called an academic tutor  is a person who provides assistance or tutelage to one or more people on certain subject areas or skills. the tutor spends a few hours on a daily  weekly  or monthly basis to transfer their expertise on the topic or skill to the student. tutoring can take place in different settings  such as a classroom  a formal tutoring center  or the home of the tutor/learner. as a teaching-learning method  tutoring is characterized by how it differs from formal teaching methods on the basis of the (in)formality of the setting as well as the flexibility in pedagogical methods in terms of duration  pace of teaching  evaluation and tutor-tutee rapport.   == history == tutoring began as an informal and unstructured method of educational assistance  dating back to periods in ancient greece. tutors operated on an ad-hoc or impromptu basis in varied and unfixed settings wherein the main goal of the tutor was to impart knowledge to the learner in order to help the latter gain proficiency in the subject area. methods of tutoring only began to become more structured after the 20th century through focus and specialisation in the training of tutors  application of tutoring  and evaluation of tutors. from the 20th century onwards  with the rapid spread of mainstream education  the demand for tutoring has also increased as a way to supplement formal education.   == british and irish secondary schools ==  in british and irish secondary schools  form tutors are given the responsibilities of a form or class of students in a particular year group (up to 30 students). they usually work in year teams headed by a year leader  year head  or guidance teacher.form tutors will provide parents with most of the information about their child s progress and any problems they might be experiencing. ordinarily  the form tutor is the person who contacts a parent if there is a problem at school  however  the year leader or guidance teacher may contact the parents  since the form tutor has full-time responsibility as a specialist subject teacher.   == private tutoring in asia == a 2012 study by the asian development bank and the comparative education research centre at the university of hong kong pointed out that private tutoring can dominate the lives of young people and their families  maintain and exacerbate social inequalities  divert needed household income into an unregulated industry  and create inefficiencies in education systems. it can also undermine official statements about fee-free education and create threats to social cohesion.in south korea  nearly 90% of elementary students receive some sort of shadow education. in hong kong  about 85% of senior secondary students do so. 60% of primary students in west bengal  india  and 60% of secondary students in kazakhstan receive private tutoring.demand for tutoring in asia is exploding  by comparison globally  shadow education is most
extensive in asia. this is partly due to the stratification of education systems  cultural factors  perceptions of shortcomings in regular school systems  and the combination of growing wealth and smaller family sizes. therefore  the education sector has become a profitable industry which businesses have created different kinds of products and advertisement such us  the king/queen of tutorial  a usual advertisement tactic of hong kong tutorial centers that has spread to south korea  thailand  sri lanka and india where tutors achieve  celebrity-like status . in some cases  successful southeast asian tutors will even embrace the title of  tutor . online private tutor matching platform and online learning platform offering online learning materials are other creations. in cambodia  most tutoring is provided by teachers  whereas in hong kong  it is provided by individuals  small companies or large companies. in mongolia  most tutoring is labor-intensive  while entrepreneurs in south korea make use of computers and other forms of technology.   === policy === a 2012 study by the asian development bank and the comparative education research centre at the university of hong kong recommended policymakers across the region take a closer look at how ‘shadow education’ affects family budgets  children s time  and national education systems. it suggested that in order to reduce the need for private lessons  improvements in mainstream schools should be made. regulations are also needed to protect consumers.   == costs of tutoring == some studies have estimated costs associated with  shadow education . in pakistan  expenditures on tutoring per child averaged $3.40 a month in 2011. in india  average spending was lower  but still equated to about $2 per month.in georgia  household expenditures for private tutoring at the secondary school level was $48 million in 2011.  in hong kong  the business of providing private tutoring to secondary schools reached $255 million in 2011.in india  a 2008 survey estimated the size of the private tutoring sector to be $6.4 billion. in japan  families spent $12 billion in 2010 on private tutoring.in the republic of korea  where the government has attempted to cool down the private tutoring market  shadow education costs have continually grown  reaching a staggering $17.3 billion in 2010. household expenditures on private tutoring are equivalent to about 80% of government expenditures on public education for primary and secondary students.in the united states  the tutoring market is fragmented. some online tutoring marketplaces  however  have managed to aggregate a large number of private tutors on their platform and also tutoring data. for example  one such site has over 34 000 registered tutors in california and made public their tutoring hourly rate data.   == effectiveness == in many countries  individuals can become tutors without training. in some countries  including cambodia  georgia  kazakhstan  lao pdr  and tajikistan  the pattern of classroom teachers supplementing their incomes by
tutoring students after school hours is more a necessity than a choice  as many teachers’ salaries hover close to the poverty line.in the republic of korea  the number of private tutors expanded roughly 7.1% annually on average from 2001 to 2006  and by 2009 the sector was the largest employer of graduates from the humanities and social sciences.private tutoring is not always effective in raising academic achievement  and in some schools students commonly skip classes or sleep through lessons because they are tired after excessive external study. this means that the shadow system can make regular schooling less efficient.teachers who spend more time focusing on private lessons than regular classes can cause greater inefficiencies in the mainstream school system. situations in which teachers provide extra private lessons for pupils for whom they are already responsible in the public system can lead to corruption  particularly when teachers deliberately teach less in their regular classes in order to promote the market for private lessons.when private tutoring is provided by well trained tutor however the effects can be dramatic  with pupils improving performance by two standard deviations. see also bloom s 2 sigma problem.   == types of tutoring == there can be an existing overlap between different types of tutoring with respect to the setting or location of tutoring  the size of tutor-learner pairings/groups  and the method of tutoring provided  for example  one-on-one peer tutoring can take place through online tutoring. tutoring is typically private since it is exists independent of the system of public and private education  that is  one can be enrolled in public/private schooling and attend private tutoring services.   === academic coaching === academic coaching is a type of mentoring applied to academics.  coaching involves a collaborative approach. coaches try to help students learn how they best learn and how to operate in an academic environment. tutors help students learn the material in individual courses while coaches help students learn how to be successful in school. in college  that includes such topics as  study skills  time management  stress management  effective reading  note-taking  test-taking  and understanding how to use a syllabus. academic coaches meet with the student regularly throughout the semester. coaches work with students in all kinds of situations  not just those who are struggling academically.  academic coaching is also serves to help students prepare for entrance exams to gain entry to schools or universities  and it is a particularly popular in asia. for example  in india  a majority of students  be it of any class or stream  visit a coaching center or a  study circle.    === home-based tutoring ===  in-home tutoring is a form of tutoring that occurs in the home. most often the tutoring relates to an academic subject or test preparation. this is in contrast to tutoring centers or tutoring provided through after-school programs. the service most often involves one-on-one attention provided
to the pupil. due to the informal and private nature of in-home tutoring  there is limited substantial or conclusive information on in-home tutoring.   === online tutoring === online tutoring is another way for a student to receive academic help  either scheduled or on-demand. sessions are done through an application where a student and tutor can communicate. common tools include chat  whiteboard  web conferencing  teleconferencing  online videos and other specialized applets which make it easier to convey information back and forth. online tutoring has relatively recently emerged as a mechanism to provide tutoring services in contrast to more traditional in-person teaching. one of the potential drawbacks of online tutoring stems from the influx or sensory overload of information from different materials.  for example  mate- rial presented in multiple modalities run the risk of interrupting the learner from a coherent learn- ing experience  of imposing a “split attention” effect (the mind cannot concentrate on two things simultaneously)  or of overloading the learner s limited supply of cognitive resources.    === peer tutoring === peer tutoring refers to the method of tutoring that involves members of the same peer group teaching or tutoring one another. the characteristics of a peer tutoring group/pairing vary across age  socioeconomic class  gender  ethnicity. it has been defined as  a class of practices and strategies that employs peers as one-on-one teachers to provide individualized instruction  practice  repetition  and clarification of concepts    == effects ==   === academic performance === studies have found that peer tutoring provides academic benefits for learners across the subject areas of  reading  mathematics  science  and social studies  peer tutoring has also been found to be an effective teaching method in enhancing the reading comprehension skills of students  especially that of students with a low academic performance at the secondary level in schools. additionally  peer tutoring has been proven especially useful for those with learning disabilities at the elementary level  while there is mixed evidence showing the effectiveness of peer tutoring for those at the secondary level.   === economic effects === although certain types of tutoring arrangements can require a salary for the tutor  typically tutoring is free of cost and thus financially affordable for learners. the cost-effectiveness of tutoring can prove to be especially beneficial for learners from low-income backgrounds or resource-strapped regions. in contrast  paid tutoring arrangements can create or further highlight socioeconomic disparities between low-income  middle-income and high-income populations. a study found that access to private tutoring was less financially affordable for low-income families  who thus benefited less from private tutoring as compared to high-income populations  who had the resources to profit from private tutoring.   == issues ==   === tutoring as  shadow education  === tutoring has also emerged as a supplement to public and private schooling in many countries. the supplementary nature of tutoring is a feature in
the domain of what some scholars have termed  shadow education . shadow education has been defined as  a set of educational activities that occur out side formal schooling and are designed to enhance the student s formal school career.  the term  shadow  has four components to it  firstly  the existence of and need for tutoring is produced by the existence of the formal education system  secondly  the formal education system is the mainstream system and thus tutoring is its shadow  thirdly  the focus remains on mainstream education in schools  fourthly  tutoring is largely informal and unstructured as compared to formal or mainstream education.  as a consequence of the popularity of shadow education  private tutoring can sometimes overshadow mainstream education with more priority given to enrolling in private tutoring centers. mark bray claims that  especially near the time of major external examinations  schools in some countries may be perceived by pupils to be less able to cater for their specific needs.    == tutoring agency == a tutoring agency is a business that acts as an intermediary between people who are looking for tutors and tutors wishing to offer their services. the term tuition agency is an alternative term  used specifically in singapore and malaysia.   === purpose and function === tutoring agencies are commercial organisations  specializing in introducing tutors to students requiring help in academic studies. tutoring agencies exist largely due to the problems parents and students face in finding a specialist who can help them with the study of one or more specific subjects. some agencies contract directly with the client (usually parents) to provide service. the point of contact is between the client and the agency. tutoring agencies may charge tutors a commission fee for assigning jobs to them. in india  malaysia and singapore  this fee would typically be a half of the allocated job s monthly revenue to a tutor. jobs that are assigned for a short duration  for example in the case of last minute revision for an exam  may carry a lesser fee of around a quarter of the job s monthly revenue to a tutor. some tutoring agencies do not charge commission fees for jobs assigned to tutors or students. alternatively  clients may be sent a list of names of tutors who have pre-registered with the tutoring agency and then contact the names on the list to ascertain which tutors are available and  if acceptable  make contractual arrangements with the chosen tutor. at the same time  tutors are given the name and contact details of the client and are encouraged to get their call in first.   === tutoring around the world === tutoring agencies are common in many countries including the uk  the us  australia  the uae  singapore  and malaysia. in most countries tutoring is not regulated. in the uk after much discussion in the media a limited company
was set up in october 2013. the tutors  association the tutor association was previously named the london association of certified financial analysts.in the us there are at least two professional tutoring associations  the american tutoring association and the national tutoring association. in australia there is the australian tutoring association. in singapore  tutoring agencies  also known as tuition agencies  are not regulated by the ministry of education.   === tutors === there are both full-time and part-time tutors. part-time tutors may be students who want to earn extra money while they are still going to school  such as undergraduates of universities. tutors may be self-employed. if the agency does not employ the tutors  then the agency is remunerated by the tutor  who adds a fee to the amount that the client is charged each lesson  and then passes the fees back to the agency weekly or monthly as required. in singapore  although tutor registration is generally free of charge  tutors will have to pay a percentage of his or her first month s tuition fee  usually 60% to the tuition agency as commission for referring them to students. tutors will subsequently be paid the full month s tuition fees by the customer (the parents)  according to the pre-arranged agreement. if tutors are employed by the agency  the agency handles all client contract and payment arrangements. the agency is then responsible for employing the tutor with all that employment entails. from the agency s point of view  there is no longer any requirement to declare the fees charged by the agency (something which can cause friction with clients who do not appreciate the high cost of recruitment  vetting etc.) but they are now responsible for employee benefits due to the tutor.   === controversies === in singapore  parents and students have positive as well as negative comments.tutoring centers (tuition centers) must be registered with the singapore ministry of education. however  tutoring agencies (tuition agencies) are not. instead  tutoring agencies are required to register with the accounting and corporate regulatory authority (acra) under the business registration act. there is a history of poor compliance and consumer complaints.   == see also == cram school homework coach learning by teaching mentorship peer-mediated instruction teacher tuition agency tutorial virtual education   == references ==
